Title: Five of Maxwell's Papers

Author: James Clerk Maxwell

Release date: January 1, 2004 [eBook #4908]
                Most recently updated: February 25, 2014

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Gordon Keener


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK FIVE OF MAXWELL'S PAPERS ***




Produced by Gordon Keener






This eBook includes 5 papers or speeches by James Clerk Maxwell.

The contents are:

   Foramen Centrale
   Theory of Compound Colours
   Poinsot's Theory
   Address to the Mathematical
   Introductory Lecture




On the Unequal Sensibility of the Foramen Centrale to Light of
different Colours.

James Clerk Maxwell


[From the _Report of the British Association_, 1856.]


When observing the spectrum formed by looking at a long ve rtical slit
through a simple prism, I noticed an elongated dark spot running up
and down in the blue, and following the motion of the eye as it moved
_up and down_ the spectrum, but refusing to pass out of the blue into
the other colours.  It was plain that the spot belonged both to the
eye and to the blue part of the spectrum.  The result to which I have
come is, that the appearance is due to the yellow spot on the retina,
commonly called the _Foramen Centrale_ of Soemmering.  The most
convenient method of observing the spot is by presenting to the eye in
not too rapid succession, blue and yellow glasses, or, still better,
allowing blue and yellow papers to revolve slowly before the eye.  In
this way the spot is seen in the blue.  It fades rapidly, but is
renewed every time the yellow comes in to relieve the effect of the
blue.  By using a Nicol's prism along with this apparatus, the brushes
of Haidinger are well seen in connexion with the spot, and the fact of
the brushes being the spot analysed by polarized light becomes
evident.  If we look steadily at an object behind a series of bright
bars which move in front of it, we shall see a curious bending of the
bars as they come up to the place of the yellow spot.  The part which
comes over the spot seems to start in advance of the rest of the bar,
and this would seem to indicate a greater rapidity of sensation at the
yellow spot than in the surrounding retina.  But I find the experiment
difficult, and I hope for better results from more accurate observers.




On the Theory of Compound Colours with reference to Mixtures of
Blue and Yellow Light.

James Clerk Maxwell


[From the _Report of the British Association_, 1856.]


When we mix together blue and yellow paint, we obtain green paint.
This fact is well known to all who have handled colours; and it is
universally admitted that blue and yellow make green.  Red, yellow,
and blue, being the primary colours among painters, green is regarded
as a secondary colour, arising from the mixture of blue and yellow.
Newton, however, found that the green of the spectrum was not the same
thing as the mixture of two colours of the spectrum, for such a
mixture could be separated by the prism, while the green of the
spectrum resisted further decomposition.  But still it was believed
that yellow and blue would make a green, though not that of the
spectrum.  As far as I am aware, the first experiment on the subject
is that of M. Plateau, who, before 1819, made a disc with alternate
sectors of prussian blue and gamboge, and observed that, when
spinning, the resultant tint was not green, but a neutral gray,
inclining sometimes to yellow or blue, but never to green.
Prof. J. D. Forbes of Edinburgh made similar experiments in 1849, with
the same result.  Prof. Helmholtz of Konigsberg, to whom we owe the
most complete investigation on visible colour, has given the true
explanation of this phenomenon.  The result of mixing two coloured
powders is not by any means the same as mixing the beams of light
which flow from each separately.  In the latter case we receive all
the light which comes either from the one powder or the other.  In the
former, much of the light coming from one powder falls on particles of
the other, and we receive only that portion which has escaped
absorption by one or other.  Thus the light coming from a mixture of
blue and yellow powder, consists partly of light coming directly from
blue particles or yellow particles, and partly of light acted on by
both blue and yellow particles.  This latter light is green, since the
blue stops the red, yellow, and orange, and the yellow stops the blue
and violet.  I have made experiments on the mixture of blue and yellow
light--by rapid rotation, by combined reflexion and transmission, by
viewing them out of focus, in stripes, at a great distance, by
throwing the colours of the spectrum on a screen, and by receiving
them into the eye directly; and I have arranged a portable apparatus
by which any one may see the result of this or any other mixture of
the colours of the spectrum.  In all these cases blue and yellow do
not make green.  I have also made experiments on the mixture of
coloured powders.  Those which I used principally were "mineral blue"
(from copper) and "chrome-yellow."  Other blue and yellow pigments gave
curious results, but it was more difficult to make the mixtures, and
the greens were less uniform in tint.  The mixtures of these colours
were made by weight, and were painted on discs of paper, which were
afterwards treated in the manner described in my paper "On Colour as
perceived by the Eye," in the _Transactions of the Royal Society of
Edinburgh_, Vol. XXI. Part 2.  The visible effect of the colour is
estimated in terms of the standard-coloured papers:--vermilion (V),
ultramarine (U), and emerald-green (E).  The accuracy of the results,
and their significance, can be best understood by referring to the
paper before mentioned.  I shall denote mineral blue by B, and
chrome-yellow by Y; and B3 Y5 means a mixture of three parts blue and
five parts yellow.

       Given Colour.     Standard Colours.          Coefficient
                          V.    U.    E.           of brightness.

         B8    , 100  =   2    36     7   ............   45

         B7  Y1, 100  =   1    18    17   ............   37

         B6  Y2, 100  =   4    11    34   ............   49

         B5  Y3, 100  =   9     5    40   ............   54

         B4  Y4, 100  =  15     1    40   ............   56

         B3  Y5, 100  =  22   - 2    44   ............   64

         B2  Y6, 100  =  35   -10    51   ............   76

         B1  Y7, 100  =  64   -19    64   ............  109

             Y8, 100  = 180   -27   124   ............  277

The columns V, U, E give the proportions of the standard colours which
are equivalent to 100 of the given colour; and the sum of V, U, E
gives a coefficient, which gives a general idea of the brightness.  It
will be seen that the first admixture of yellow _diminishes_ the
brightness of the blue.  The negative values of U indicate that a
mixture of V, U, and E cannot be made equivalent to the given colour.
The experiments from which these results were taken had the negative
values transferred to the other side of the equation.  They were all
made by means of the colour-top, and were verified by repetition at
different times.  It may be necessary to remark, in conclusion, with
reference to the mode of registering visible colours in terms of three
arbitrary standard colours, that it proceeds upon that theory of three
primary elements in the sensation of colour, which treats the
investigation of the laws of visible colour as a branch of human
physiology, incapable of being deduced from the laws of light itself,
as set forth in physical optics.  It takes advantage of the methods of
optics to study vision itself; and its appeal is not to physical
principles, but to our consciousness of our own sensations.




On an Instrument to illustrate Poinsot's Theory of Rotation.

James Clerk Maxwell


[From the _Report of the British Association_, 1856.]


In studying the rotation of a solid body according to Poinsot's
method, we have to consider the successive positions of the
instantaneous axis of rotation with reference both to directions fixed
in space and axes assumed in the moving body.  The paths traced out by
the pole of this axis on the _invariable plane_ and on the _central
ellipsoid_ form interesting subjects of mathematical investigation.
But when we attempt to follow with our eye the motion of a rotating
body, we find it difficult to determine through what point of the
_body_ the instantaneous axis passes at any time,--and to determine its
path must be still more difficult.  I have endeavoured to render
visible the path of the instantaneous axis, and to vary the
circumstances of motion, by means of a top of the same kind as that
used by Mr Elliot, to illustrate precession*.  The body of the
instrument is a hollow cone of wood, rising from a ring, 7 inches in
diameter and 1 inch thick.  An iron axis, 8 inches long, screws into
the vertex of the cone.  The lower extremity has a point of hard
steel, which rests in an agate cup, and forms the support of the
instrument.  An iron nut, three ounces in weight, is made to screw on
the axis, and to be fixed at any point; and in the wooden ring are
screwed four bolts, of three ounces, working horizontally, and four
bolts, of one ounce, working vertically.  On the upper part of the
axis is placed a disc of card, on which are drawn four concentric
rings.  Each ring is divided into four quadrants, which are coloured
red, yellow, green, and blue.  The spaces between the rings are white.
When the top is in motion, it is easy to see in which quadrant the
instantaneous axis is at any moment and the distance between it and
the axis of the instrument; and we observe,--1st. That the
instantaneous axis travels in a closed curve, and returns to its
original position in the body.  2ndly. That by working the vertical
bolts, we can make the axis of the instrument the centre of this
closed curve.  It will then be one of the principal axes of inertia.
3rdly. That, by working the nut on the axis, we can make the order of
colours either red, yellow, green, blue, or the reverse.  When the
order of colours is in the same direction as the rotation, it
indicates that the axis of the instrument is that of greatest moment
of inertia.  4thly. That if we screw the two pairs of opposite
horizontal bolts to different distances from the axis, the path of the
instantaneous pole will no longer be equidistant from the axis, but
will describe an ellipse, whose longer axis is in the direction of the
mean axis of the instrument.  5thly. That if we now make one of the
two horizontal axes less and the other greater than the vertical axis,
the instantaneous pole will separate from the axis of the instrument,
and the axis will incline more and more till the spinning can no
longer go on, on account of the obliquity.  It is easy to see that, by
attending to the laws of motion, we may produce any of the above
effects at pleasure, and illustrate many different propositions by
means of the same instrument.

* _Transactions of the Royal Scottish Society of Arts_, 1855.




Address to the Mathematical and Physical Sections of the British
Association.

James Clerk Maxwell


[From the _British Association Report_, Vol. XL.]

[Liverpool, _September_ 15, 1870.]


At several of the recent Meetings of the British Association the
varied and important business of the Mathematical and Physical Section
has been introduced by an Address, the subject of which has been left
to the selection of the President for the time being.  The perplexing
duty of choosing a subject has not, however, fallen to me.

Professor Sylvester, the President of Section A at the Exeter Meeting,
gave us a noble vindication of pure mathematics by laying bare, as it
were, the very working of the mathematical mind, and setting before
us, not the array of symbols and brackets which form the armoury of
the mathematician, or the dry results which are only the monuments of
his conquests, but the mathematician himself, with all his human
faculties directed by his professional sagacity to the pursuit,
apprehension, and exhibition of that ideal harmony which he feels to
be the root of all knowledge, the fountain of all pleasure, and the
condition of all action.  The mathematician has, above all things, an
eye for symmetry; and Professor Sylvester has not only recognized the
symmetry formed by the combination of his own subject with those of
the former Presidents, but has pointed out the duties of his successor
in the following characteristic note:--

"Mr Spottiswoode favoured the Section, in his opening Address, with a
combined history of the progress of Mathematics and Physics; Dr.
Tyndall's address was virtually on the limits of Physical Philosophy;
the one here in print," says Prof. Sylvester, "is an attempted faint
adumbration of the nature of Mathematical Science in the abstract.
What is wanting (like a fourth sphere resting on three others in
contact) to build up the Ideal Pyramid is a discourse on the Relation
of the two branches (Mathematics and Physics) to, their action and
reaction upon, one another, a magnificent theme, with which it is to
be hoped that some future President of Section A will crown the
edifice and make the Tetralogy (symbolizable by _A+A'_, _A_, _A'_,
_AA'_) complete."

The theme thus distinctly laid down for his successor by our late
President is indeed a magnificent one, far too magnificent for any
efforts of mine to realize.  I have endeavoured to follow Mr
Spottiswoode, as with far-reaching vision he distinguishes the systems
of science into which phenomena, our knowledge of which is still in
the nebulous stage, are growing.  I have been carried by the
penetrating insight and forcible expression of Dr Tyndall into that
sanctuary of minuteness and of power where molecules obey the laws of
their existence, clash together in fierce collision, or grapple in yet
more fierce embrace, building up in secret the forms of visible
things.  I have been guided by Prof. Sylvester towards those serene
heights

    "Where never creeps a cloud, or moves a wind,
     Nor ever falls the least white star of snow,
     Nor ever lowest roll of thunder moans,
     Nor sound of human sorrow mounts to mar
     Their sacred everlasting calm."

But who will lead me into that still more hidden and dimmer region
where Thought weds Fact, where the mental operation of the
mathematician and the physical action of the molecules are seen in
their true relation?  Does not the way to it pass through the very den
of the metaphysician, strewed with the remains of former explorers,
and abhorred by every man of science?  It would indeed be a foolhardy
adventure for me to take up the valuable time of the Section by
leading you into those speculations which require, as we know,
thousands of years even to shape themselves intelligibly.

But we are met as cultivators of mathematics and physics.  In our
daily work we are led up to questions the same in kind with those of
metaphysics; and we approach them, not trusting to the native
penetrating power of our own minds, but trained by a long-continued
adjustment of our modes of thought to the facts of external nature.

As mathematicians, we perform certain mental operations on the symbols
of number or of quantity, and, by proceeding step by step from more
simple to more complex operations, we are enabled to express the same
thing in many different forms.  The equivalence of these different
forms, though a necessary consequence of self-evident axioms, is not
always, to our minds, self-evident; but the mathematician, who by long
practice has acquired a familiarity with many of these forms, and has
become expert in the processes which lead from one to another, can
often transform a perplexing expression into another which explains
its meaning in more intelligible language.

As students of Physics we observe phenomena under varied
circumstances, and endeavour to deduce the laws of their relations.
Every natural phenomenon is, to our minds, the result of an infinitely
complex system of conditions.  What we set ourselves to do is to
unravel these conditions, and by viewing the phenomenon in a way which
is in itself partial and imperfect, to piece out its features one by
one, beginning with that which strikes us first, and thus gradually
learning how to look at the whole phenomenon so as to obtain a
continually greater degree of clearness and distinctness.  In this
process, the feature which presents itself most forcibly to the
untrained inquirer may not be that which is considered most
fundamental by the experienced man of science; for the success of any
physical investigation depends on the judicious selection of what is
to be observed as of primary importance, combined with a voluntary
abstraction of the mind from those features which, however attractive
they appear, we are not yet sufficiently advanced in science to
investigate with profit.

Intellectual processes of this kind have been going on since the first
formation of language, and are going on still.  No doubt the feature
which strikes us first and most forcibly in any phenomenon, is the
pleasure or the pain which accompanies it, and the agreeable or
disagreeable results which follow after it.  A theory of nature from
this point of view is embodied in many of our words and phrases, and
is by no means extinct even in our deliberate opinions.

It was a great step in science when men became convinced that, in
order to understand the nature of things, they must begin by asking,
not whether a thing is good or bad, noxious or beneficial, but of what
kind is it? and how much is there of it?  Quality and Quantity were
then first recognized as the primary features to be observed in
scientific inquiry.

As science has been developed, the domain of quantity has everywhere
encroached on that of quality, till the process of scientific inquiry
seems to have become simply the measurement and registration of
quantities, combined with a mathematical discussion of the numbers
thus obtained.  It is this scientific method of directing our
attention to those features of phenomena which may be regarded as
quantities which brings physical research under the influence of
mathematical reasoning.  In the work of the Section we shall have
abundant examples of the successful application of this method to the
most recent conquests of science; but I wish at present to direct your
attention to some of the reciprocal effects of the progress of science
on those elementary conceptions which are sometimes thought to be
beyond the reach of change.

If the skill of the mathematician has enabled the experimentalist to
see that the quantities which he has measured are connected by
necessary relations, the discoveries of physics have revealed to the
mathematician new forms of quantities which he could never have
imagined for himself.

Of the methods by which the mathematician may make his labours most
useful to the student of nature, that which I think is at present most
important is the systematic classification of quantities.

The quantities which we study in mathematics and physics may be
classified in two different ways.

The student who wishes to master any particular science must make
himself familiar with the various kinds of quantities which belong to
that science.  When he understands all the relations between these
quantities, he regards them as forming a connected system, and he
classes the whole system of quantities together as belonging to that
particular science.  This classification is the most natural from a
physical point of view, and it is generally the first in order of
time.

But when the student has become acquainted with several different
sciences, he finds that the mathematical processes and trains of
reasoning in one science resemble those in another so much that his
knowledge of the one science may be made a most useful help in the
study of the other.

When he examines into the reason of this, he finds that in the two
sciences he has been dealing with systems of quantities, in which the
mathematical forms of the relations of the quantities are the same in
both systems, though the physical nature of the quantities may be
utterly different.

He is thus led to recognize a classification of quantities on a new
principle, according to which the physical nature of the quantity is
subordinated to its mathematical form.  This is the point of view
which is characteristic of the mathematician; but it stands second to
the physical aspect in order of time, because the human mind, in order
to conceive of different kinds of quantities, must have them presented
to it by nature.

I do not here refer to the fact that all quantities, as such, are
subject to the rules of arithmetic and algebra, and are therefore
capable of being submitted to those dry calculations which represent,
to so many minds, their only idea of mathematics.

The human mind is seldom satisfied, and is certainly never exercising
its highest functions, when it is doing the work of a calculating
machine.  What the man of science, whether he is a mathematician or a
physical inquirer, aims at is, to acquire and develope clear ideas of
the things he deals with.  For this purpose he is willing to enter on
long calculations, and to be for a season a calculating machine, if he
can only at last make his ideas clearer.

But if he finds that clear ideas are not to be obtained by means of
processes the steps of which he is sure to forget before he has
reached the conclusion, it is much better that he should turn to
another method, and try to understand the subject by means of
well-chosen illustrations derived from subjects with which he is more
familiar.

We all know how much more popular the illustrative method of
exposition is found, than that in which bare processes of reasoning
and calculation form the principal subject of discourse.

Now a truly scientific illustration is a method to enable the mind to
grasp some conception or law in one branch of science, by placing
before it a conception or a law in a different branch of science, and
directing the mind to lay hold of that mathematical form which is
common to the corresponding ideas in the two sciences, leaving out of
account for the present the difference between the physical nature of
the real phenomena.

The correctness of such an illustration depends on whether the two
systems of ideas which are compared together are really analogous in
form, or whether, in other words, the corresponding physical
quantities really belong to the same mathematical class.  When this
condition is fulfilled, the illustration is not only convenient for
teaching science in a pleasant and easy manner, but the recognition of
the formal analogy between the two systems of ideas leads to a
knowledge of both, more profound than could be obtained by studying
each system separately.

There are men who, when any relation or law, however complex, is put
before them in a symbolical form, can grasp its full meaning as a
relation among abstract quantities.  Such men sometimes treat with
indifference the further statement that quantities actually exist in
nature which fulfil this relation.  The mental image of the concrete
reality seems rather to disturb than to assist their contemplations.
But the great majority of mankind are utterly unable, without long
training, to retain in their minds the unembodied symbols of the pure
mathematician, so that, if science is ever to become popular, and yet
remain scientific, it must be by a profound study and a copious
application of those principles of the mathematical classification of
quantities which, as we have seen, lie at the root of every truly
scientific illustration.

There are, as I have said, some minds which can go on contemplating
with satisfaction pure quantities presented to the eye by symbols, and
to the mind in a form which none but mathematicians can conceive.

There are others who feel more enjoyment in following geometrical
forms, which they draw on paper, or build up in the empty space before
them.

Others, again, are not content unless they can project their whole
physical energies into the scene which they conjure up.  They learn at
what a rate the planets rush through space, and they experience a
delightful feeling of exhilaration.  They calculate the forces with
which the heavenly bodies pull at one another, and they feel their own
muscles straining with the effort.

To such men momentum, energy, mass are not mere abstract expressions
of the results of scientific inquiry.  They are words of power, which
stir their souls like the memories of childhood.

For the sake of persons of these different types, scientific truth
should be presented in different forms, and should be regarded as
equally scientific whether it appears in the robust form and the vivid
colouring of a physical illustration, or in the tenuity and paleness
of a symbolical expression.

Time would fail me if I were to attempt to illustrate by examples the
scientific value of the classification of quantities.  I shall only
mention the name of that important class of magnitudes having
direction in space which Hamilton has called vectors, and which form
the subject-matter of the Calculus of Quaternions, a branch of
mathematics which, when it shall have been thoroughly understood by
men of the illustrative type, and clothed by them with physical
imagery, will become, perhaps under some new name, a most powerful
method of communicating truly scientific knowledge to persons
apparently devoid of the calculating spirit.

The mutual action and reaction between the different departments of
human thought is so interesting to the student of scientific progress,
that, at the risk of still further encroaching on the valuable time of
the Section, I shall say a few words on a branch of physics which not
very long ago would have been considered rather a branch of
metaphysics.  I mean the atomic theory, or, as it is now called, the
molecular theory of the constitution of bodies.

Not many years ago if we had been asked in what regions of physical
science the advance of discovery was least apparent, we should have
pointed to the hopelessly distant fixed stars on the one hand, and to
the inscrutable delicacy of the texture of material bodies on the
other.

Indeed, if we are to regard Comte as in any degree representing the
scientific opinion of his time, the research into what takes place
beyond our own solar system seemed then to be exceedingly unpromising,
if not altogether illusory.

The opinion that the bodies which we see and handle, which we can set
in motion or leave at rest, which we can break in pieces and destroy,
are composed of smaller bodies which we cannot see or handle, which
are always in motion, and which can neither be stopped nor broken in
pieces, nor in any way destroyed or deprived of the least of their
properties, was known by the name of the Atomic theory.  It was
associated with the names of Democritus, Epicurus, and Lucretius, and
was commonly supposed to admit the existence only of atoms and void,
to the exclusion of any other basis of things from the universe.

In many physical reasonings and mathematical calculations we are
accustomed to argue as if such substances as air, water, or metal,
which appear to our senses uniform and continuous, were strictly and
mathematically uniform and continuous.

We know that we can divide a pint of water into many millions of
portions, each of which is as fully endowed with all the properties of
water as the whole pint was; and it seems only natural to conclude
that we might go on subdividing the water for ever, just as we can
never come to a limit in subdividing the space in which it is
contained.  We have heard how Faraday divided a grain of gold into an
inconceivable number of separate particles, and we may see Dr Tyndall
produce from a mere suspicion of nitrite of butyle an immense cloud,
the minute visible portion of which is still cloud, and therefore must
contain many molecules of nitrite of butyle.

But evidence from different and independent sources is now crowding in
upon us which compels us to admit that if we could push the process of
subdivision still further we should come to a limit, because each
portion would then contain only one molecule, an individual body, one
and indivisible, unalterable by any power in nature.

Even in our ordinary experiments on very finely divided matter we find
that the substance is beginning to lose the properties which it
exhibits when in a large mass, and that effects depending on the
individual action of molecules are beginning to become prominent.

The study of these phenomena is at present the path which leads to the
development of molecular science.

That superficial tension of liquids which is called capillary
attraction is one of these phenomena.  Another important class of
phenomena are those which are due to that motion of agitation by which
the molecules of a liquid or gas are continually working their way
from one place to another, and continually changing their course, like
people hustled in a crowd.

On this depends the rate of diffusion of gases and liquids through
each other, to the study of which, as one of the keys of molecular
science, that unwearied inquirer into nature's secrets, the late Prof.
Graham, devoted such arduous labour.

The rate of electrolytic conduction is, according to Wiedemann's
theory, influenced by the same cause; and the conduction of heat in
fluids depends probably on the same kind of action.  In the case of
gases, a molecular theory has been developed by Clausius and others,
capable of mathematical treatment, and subjected to experimental
investigation; and by this theory nearly every known mechanical
property of gases has been explained on dynamical principles; so that
the properties of individual gaseous molecules are in a fair way to
become objects of scientific research.

Now Mr Stoney has pointed out[1] that the numerical results of
experiments on gases render it probable that the mean distance of
their particles at the ordinary temperature and pressure is a quantity
of the same order of magnitude as a millionth of a millimetre, and Sir
William Thomson has since[2] shewn, by several independent lines of
argument, drawn from phenomena so different in themselves as the
electrification of metals by contact, the tension of soap-bubbles, and
the friction of air, that in ordinary solids and liquids the average
distance between contiguous molecules is less than the
hundred-millionth, and greater than the two-thousand-millionth of a
centimetre.

[1] _Phil. Mag._, Aug. 1868.
[2] _Nature_, March 31, 1870.

These, of course, are exceedingly rough estimates, for they are
derived from measurements some of which are still confessedly very
rough; but if at the present time, we can form even a rough plan for
arriving at results of this kind, we may hope that, as our means of
experimental inquiry become more accurate and more varied, our
conception of a molecule will become more definite, so that we may be
able at no distant period to estimate its weight with a greater degree
of precision.

A theory, which Sir W. Thomson has founded on Helmholtz's splendid
hydrodynamical theorems, seeks for the properties of molecules in the
ring vortices of a uniform, frictionless, incompressible fluid.  Such
whirling rings may be seen when an experienced smoker sends out a
dexterous puff of smoke into the still air, but a more evanescent
phenomenon it is difficult to conceive.  This evanescence is owing to
the viscosity of the air; but Helmholtz has shewn that in a perfect
fluid such a whirling ring, if once generated, would go on whirling
for ever, would always consist of the very same portion of the fluid
which was first set whirling, and could never be cut in two by any
natural cause.  The generation of a ring-vortex is of course equally
beyond the power of natural causes, but once generated, it has the
properties of individuality, permanence in quantity, and
indestructibility.  It is also the recipient of impulse and of energy,
which is all we can affirm of matter; and these ring-vortices are
capable of such varied connexions and knotted self-involutions, that
the properties of differently knotted vortices must be as different as
those of different kinds of molecules can be.

If a theory of this kind should be found, after conquering the
enormous mathematical difficulties of the subject, to represent in any
degree the actual properties of molecules, it will stand in a very
different scientific position from those theories of molecular action
which are formed by investing the molecule with an arbitrary system of
central forces invented expressly to account for the observed
phenomena.

In the vortex theory we have nothing arbitrary, no central forces or
occult properties of any other kind.  We have nothing but matter and
motion, and when the vortex is once started its properties are all
determined from the original impetus, and no further assumptions are
possible.

Even in the present undeveloped state of the theory, the contemplation
of the individuality and indestructibility of a ring-vortex in a
perfect fluid cannot fail to disturb the commonly received opinion
that a molecule, in order to be permanent, must be a very hard body.

In fact one of the first conditions which a molecule must fulfil is,
apparently, inconsistent with its being a single hard body.  We know
from those spectroscopic researches which have thrown so much light on
different branches of science, that a molecule can be set into a state
of internal vibration, in which it gives off to the surrounding medium
light of definite refrangibility--light, that is, of definite
wave-length and definite period of vibration.  The fact that all the
molecules (say, of hydrogen) which we can procure for our experiments,
when agitated by heat or by the passage of an electric spark, vibrate
precisely in the same periodic time, or, to speak more accurately,
that their vibrations are composed of a system of simple vibrations
having always the same periods, is a very remarkable fact.

I must leave it to others to describe the progress of that splendid
series of spectroscopic discoveries by which the chemistry of the
heavenly bodies has been brought within the range of human inquiry.  I
wish rather to direct your attention to the fact that, not only has
every molecule of terrestrial hydrogen the same system of periods of
free vibration, but that the spectroscopic examination of the light of
the sun and stars shews that, in regions the distance of which we can
only feebly imagine, there are molecules vibrating in as exact unison
with the molecules of terrestrial hydrogen as two tuning-forks tuned
to concert pitch, or two watches regulated to solar time.

Now this absolute equality in the magnitude of quantities, occurring
in all parts of the universe, is worth our consideration.

The dimensions of individual natural bodies are either quite
indeterminate, as in the case of planets, stones, trees, &c., or they
vary within moderate limits, as in the case of seeds, eggs, &c.; but
even in these cases small quantitative differences are met with which
do not interfere with the essential properties of the body.

Even crystals, which are so definite in geometrical form, are variable
with respect to their absolute dimensions.

Among the works of man we sometimes find a certain degree of
uniformity.

There is a uniformity among the different bullets which are cast in
the same mould, and the different copies of a book printed from the
same type.

If we examine the coins, or the weights and measures, of a civilized
country, we find a uniformity, which is produced by careful adjustment
to standards made and provided by the state.  The degree of uniformity
of these national standards is a measure of that spirit of justice in
the nation which has enacted laws to regulate them and appointed
officers to test them.

This subject is one in which we, as a scientific body, take a warm
interest; and you are all aware of the vast amount of scientific work
which has been expended, and profitably expended, in providing weights
and measures for commercial and scientific purposes.

The earth has been measured as a basis for a permanent standard of
length, and every property of metals has been investigated to guard
against any alteration of the material standards when made.  To weigh
or measure any thing with modern accuracy, requires a course of
experiment and calculation in which almost every branch of physics and
mathematics is brought into requisition.

Yet, after all, the dimensions of our earth and its time of rotation,
though, relatively to our present means of comparison, very permanent,
are not so by any physical necessity.  The earth might contract by
cooling, or it might be enlarged by a layer of meteorites falling on
it, or its rate of revolution might slowly slacken, and yet it would
continue to be as much a planet as before.

But a molecule, say of hydrogen, if either its mass or its time of
vibration were to be altered in the least, would no longer be a
molecule of hydrogen.

If, then, we wish to obtain standards of length, time, and mass which
shall be absolutely permanent, we must seek them not in the
dimensions, or the motion, or the mass of our planet, but in the
wave-length, the period of vibration, and the absolute mass of these
imperishable and unalterable and perfectly similar molecules.

When we find that here, and in the starry heavens, there are
innumerable multitudes of little bodies of exactly the same mass, so
many, and no more, to the grain, and vibrating in exactly the same
time, so many times, and no more, in a second, and when we reflect
that no power in nature can now alter in the least either the mass or
the period of any one of them, we seem to have advanced along the path
of natural knowledge to one of those points at which we must accept
the guidance of that faith by which we understand that "that which is
seen was not made of things which do appear."

One of the most remarkable results of the progress of molecular
science is the light it has thrown on the nature of irreversible
processes--processes, that is, which always tend towards and never
away from a certain limiting state.  Thus, if two gases be put into
the same vessel, they become mixed, and the mixture tends continually
to become more uniform.  If two unequally heated portions of the same
gas are put into the vessel, something of the kind takes place, and
the whole tends to become of the same temperature.  If two unequally
heated solid bodies be placed in contact, a continual approximation of
both to an intermediate temperature takes place.

In the case of the two gases, a separation may be effected by chemical
means; but in the other two cases the former state of things cannot be
restored by any natural process.

In the case of the conduction or diffusion of heat the process is not
only irreversible, but it involves the irreversible diminution of that
part of the whole stock of thermal energy which is capable of being
converted into mechanical work.

This is Thomson's theory of the irreversible dissipation of energy,
and it is equivalent to the doctrine of Clausius concerning the growth
of what he calls Entropy.

The irreversible character of this process is strikingly embodied in
Fourier's theory of the conduction of heat, where the formulae
themselves indicate, for all positive values of the time, a possible
solution which continually tends to the form of a uniform diffusion of
heat.

But if we attempt to ascend the stream of time by giving to its symbol
continually diminishing values, we are led up to a state of things in
which the formula has what is called a critical value; and if we
inquire into the state of things the instant before, we find that the
formula becomes absurd.

We thus arrive at the conception of a state of things which cannot be
conceived as the physical result of a previous state of things, and we
find that this critical condition actually existed at an epoch not in
the utmost depths of a past eternity, but separated from the present
time by a finite interval.

This idea of a beginning is one which the physical researches of
recent times have brought home to us, more than any observer of the
course of scientific thought in former times would have had reason to
expect.

But the mind of man is not, like Fourier's heated body, continually
settling down into an ultimate state of quiet uniformity, the
character of which we can already predict; it is rather like a tree,
shooting out branches which adapt themselves to the new aspects of the
sky towards which they climb, and roots which contort themselves among
the strange strata of the earth into which they delve.  To us who
breathe only the spirit of our own age, and know only the
characteristics of contemporary thought, it is as impossible to
predict the general tone of the science of the future as it is to
anticipate the particular discoveries which it will make.

Physical research is continually revealing to us new features of
natural processes, and we are thus compelled to search for new forms
of thought appropriate to these features.  Hence the importance of a
careful study of those relations between mathematics and Physics which
determine the conditions under which the ideas derived from one
department of physics may be safely used in forming ideas to be
employed in a new department.

The figure of speech or of thought by which we transfer the language
and ideas of a familiar science to one with which we are less
acquainted may be called Scientific Metaphor.

Thus the words Velocity, Momentum, Force, &c. have acquired certain
precise meanings in Elementary Dynamics.  They are also employed in
the Dynamics of a Connected System in a sense which, though perfectly
analogous to the elementary sense, is wider and more general.

These generalized forms of elementary ideas may be called metaphorical
terms in the sense in which every abstract term is metaphorical.  The
characteristic of a truly scientific system of metaphors is that each
term in its metaphorical use retains all the formal relations to the
other terms of the system which it had in its original use.  The
method is then truly scientific--that is, not only a legitimate
product of science, but capable of generating science in its turn.

There are certain electrical phenomena, again, which are connected
together by relations of the same form as those which connect
dynamical phenomena.  To apply to these the phrases of dynamics with
proper distinctions and provisional reservations is an example of a
metaphor of a bolder kind; but it is a legitimate metaphor if it
conveys a true idea of the electrical relations to those who have been
already trained in dynamics.

Suppose, then, that we have successfully introduced certain ideas
belonging to an elementary science by applying them metaphorically to
some new class of phenomena.  It becomes an important philosophical
question to determine in what degree the applicability of the old
ideas to the new subject may be taken as evidence that the new
phenomena are physically similar to the old.

The best instances for the determination of this question are those in
which two different explanations have been given of the same thing.

The most celebrated case of this kind is that of the corpuscular and
the undulatory theories of light.  Up to a certain point the phenomena
of light are equally well explained by both; beyond this point, one of
them fails.

To understand the true relation of these theories in that part of the
field where they seem equally applicable we must look at them in the
light which Hamilton has thrown upon them by his discovery that to
every brachistochrone problem there corresponds a problem of free
motion, involving different velocities and times, but resulting in the
same geometrical path.  Professor Tait has written a very interesting
paper on this subject.

According to a theory of electricity which is making great progress in
Germany, two electrical particles act on one another directly at a
distance, but with a force which, according to Weber, depends on their
relative velocity, and according to a theory hinted at by Gauss, and
developed by Riemann, Lorenz, and Neumann, acts not instantaneously,
but after a time depending on the distance.  The power with which this
theory, in the hands of these eminent men, explains every kind of
electrical phenomena must be studied in order to be appreciated.

Another theory of electricity, which I prefer, denies action at a
distance and attributes electric action to tensions and pressures in
an all-pervading medium, these stresses being the same in kind with
those familiar to engineers, and the medium being identical with that
in which light is supposed to be propagated.

Both these theories are found to explain not only the phenomena by the
aid of which they were originally constructed, but other phenomena,
which were not thought of or perhaps not known at the time; and both
have independently arrived at the same numerical result, which gives
the absolute velocity of light in terms of electrical quantities.

That theories apparently so fundamentally opposed should have so large
a field of truth common to both is a fact the philosophical importance
of which we cannot fully appreciate till we have reached a scientific
altitude from which the true relation between hypotheses so different
can be seen.

I shall only make one more remark on the relation between Mathematics
and Physics.  In themselves, one is an operation of the mind, the
other is a dance of molecules.  The molecules have laws of their own,
some of which we select as most intelligible to us and most amenable
to our calculation.  We form a theory from these partial data, and we
ascribe any deviation of the actual phenomena from this theory to
disturbing causes.  At the same time we confess that what we call
disturbing causes are simply those parts of the true circumstances
which we do not know or have neglected, and we endeavour in future to
take account of them.  We thus acknowledge that the so-called
disturbance is a mere figment of the mind, not a fact of nature, and
that in natural action there is no disturbance.

But this is not the only way in which the harmony of the material with
the mental operation may be disturbed.  The mind of the mathematician
is subject to many disturbing causes, such as fatigue, loss of memory,
and hasty conclusions; and it is found that, from these and other
causes, mathematicians make mistakes.

I am not prepared to deny that, to some mind of a higher order than
ours, each of these errors might be traced to the regular operation of
the laws of actual thinking; in fact we ourselves often do detect, not
only errors of calculation, but the causes of these errors.  This,
however, by no means alters our conviction that they are errors, and
that one process of thought is right and another process wrong.  I

One of the most profound mathematicians and thinkers of our time, the
late George Boole, when reflecting on the precise and almost
mathematical character of the laws of right thinking as compared with
the exceedingly perplexing though perhaps equally determinate laws of
actual and fallible thinking, was led to another of those points of
view from which Science seems to look out into a region beyond her own
domain.

"We must admit," he says, "that there exist laws" (of thought) "which
even the rigour of their mathematical forms does not preserve from
violation.  We must ascribe to them an authority, the essence of which
does not consist in power, a supremacy which the analogy of the
inviolable order of the natural world in no way assists us to
comprehend."




Introductory Lecture on Experimental Physics.

James Clerk Maxwell


The University of Cambridge, in accordance with that law of its
evolution, by which, while maintaining the strictest continuity
between the successive phases of its history, it adapts itself with
more or less promptness to the requirements of the times, has lately
instituted a course of Experimental Physics.  This course of study,
while it requires us to maintain in action all those powers of
attention and analysis which have been so long cultivated in the
University, calls on us to exercise our senses in observation, and our
hands in manipulation.  The familiar apparatus of pen, ink, and paper
will no longer be sufficient for us, and we shall require more room
than that afforded by a seat at a desk, and a wider area than that of
the black board.  We owe it to the munificence of our Chancellor,
that, whatever be the character in other respects of the experiments
which we hope hereafter to conduct, the material facilities for their
full development will be upon a scale which has not hitherto been
surpassed.

The main feature, therefore, of Experimental Physics at Cambridge is
the Devonshire Physical Laboratory, and I think it desirable that on
the present occasion, before we enter on the details of any special
study, we should consider by what means we, the University of
Cambridge, may, as a living body, appropriate and vitalise this new
organ, the outward shell of which we expect soon to rise before us.
The course of study at this University has always included Natural
Philosophy, as well as Pure Mathematics.  To diffuse a sound knowledge
of Physics, and to imbue the minds of our students with correct
dynamical principles, have been long regarded as among our highest
functions, and very few of us can now place ourselves in the mental
condition in which even such philosophers as the great Descartes were
involved in the days before Newton had announced the true laws of the
motion of bodies.  Indeed the cultivation and diffusion of sound
dynamical ideas has already effected a great change in the language
and thoughts even of those who make no pretensions to science, and we
are daily receiving fresh proofs that the popularisation of scientific
doctrines is producing as great an alteration in the mental state of
society as the material applications of science are effecting in its
outward life.  Such indeed is the respect paid to science, that the
most absurd opinions may become current, provided they are expressed
in language, the sound of which recals some well-known scientific
phrase.  If society is thus prepared to receive all kinds of
scientific doctrines, it is our part to provide for the diffusion and
cultivation, not only of true scientific principles, but of a spirit
of sound criticism, founded on an examination of the evidences on
which statements apparently scientific depend.

When we shall be able to employ in scientific education, not only the
trained attention of the student, and his familiarity with symbols,
but the keenness of his eye, the quickness of his ear, the delicacy of
his touch, and the adroitness of his fingers, we shall not only extend
our influence over a class of men who are not fond of cold
abstractions, but, by opening at once all the gateways of knowledge,
we shall ensure the association of the doctrines of science with those
elementary sensations which form the obscure background of all our
conscious thoughts, and which lend a vividness and relief to ideas,
which, when presented as mere abstract terms, are apt to fade entirely
from the memory.

In a course of Experimental Physics we may consider either the Physics
or the Experiments as the leading feature.  We may either employ the
experiments to illustrate the phenomena of a particular branch of
Physics, or we may make some physical research in order to exemplify a
particular experimental method.  In the order of time, we should
begin, in the Lecture Room, with a course of lectures on some branch
of Physics aided by experiments of illustration, and conclude, in the
Laboratory, with a course of experiments of research.

Let me say a few words on these two classes of
experiments,--Experiments of Illustration and Experiments of Research.
The aim of an experiment of illustration is to throw light upon some
scientific idea so that the student may be enabled to grasp it.  The
circumstances of the experiment are so arranged that the phenomenon
which we wish to observe or to exhibit is brought into prominence,
instead of being obscured and entangled among other phenomena, as it
is when it occurs in the ordinary course of nature.  To exhibit
illustrative experiments, to encourage others to make them, and to
cultivate in every way the ideas on which they throw light, forms an
important part of our duty.  The simpler the materials of an
illustrative experiment, and the more familiar they are to the
student, the more thoroughly is he likely to acquire the idea which it
is meant to illustrate.  The educational value of such experiments is
often inversely proportional to the complexity of the apparatus.  The
student who uses home-made apparatus, which is always going wrong,
often learns more than one who has the use of carefully adjusted
instruments, to which he is apt to trust, and which he dares not take
to pieces.

It is very necessary that those who are trying to learn from books the
facts of physical science should be enabled by the help of a few
illustrative experiments to recognise these facts when they meet with
them out of doors.  Science appears to us with a very different aspect
after we have found out that it is not in lecture rooms only, and by
means of the electric light projected on a screen, that we may witness
physical phenomena, but that we may find illustrations of the highest
doctrines of science in games and gymnastics, in travelling by land
and by water, in storms of the air and of the sea, and wherever there
is matter in motion.

This habit of recognising principles amid the endless variety of their
action can never degrade our sense of the sublimity of nature, or mar
our enjoyment of its beauty.  On the contrary, it tends to rescue our
scientific ideas from that vague condition in which we too often leave
them, buried among the other products of a lazy credulity, and to
raise them into their proper position among the doctrines in which our
faith is so assured, that we are ready at all times to act on them.

Experiments of illustration may be of very different kinds.  Some may
be adaptations of the commonest operations of ordinary life, others
may be carefully arranged exhibitions of some phenomenon which occurs
only under peculiar conditions.  They all, however, agree in this,
that their aim is to present some phenomenon to the senses of the
student in such a way that he may associate with it the appropriate
scientific idea.  When he has grasped this idea, the experiment which
illustrates it has served its purpose.

In an experiment of research, on the other hand, this is not the
principal aim.  It is true that an experiment, in which the principal
aim is to see what happens under certain conditions, may be regarded
as an experiment of research by those who are not yet familiar with
the result, but in experimental researches, strictly so called, the
ultimate object is to measure something which we have already seen--to
obtain a numerical estimate of some magnitude.

Experiments of this class--those in which measurement of some kind is
involved, are the proper work of a Physical Laboratory.  In every
experiment we have first to make our senses familiar with the
phenomenon, but we must not stop here, we must find out which of its
features are capable of measurement, and what measurements are
required in order to make a complete specification of the phenomenon.
We must then make these measurements, and deduce from them the result
which we require to find.

This characteristic of modern experiments--that they consist
principally of measurements,--is so prominent, that the opinion seems
to have got abroad, that in a few years all the great physical
constants will have been approximately estimated, and that the only
occupation which will then be left to men of science will be to carry
on these measurements to another place of decimals.

If this is really the state of things to which we are approaching, our
Laboratory may perhaps become celebrated as a place of conscientious
labour and consummate skill, but it will be out of place in the
University, and ought rather to be classed with the other great
workshops of our country, where equal ability is directed to more
useful ends.

But we have no right to think thus of the unsearchable riches of
creation, or of the untried fertility of those fresh minds into which
these riches will continue to be poured.  It may possibly be true
that, in some of those fields of discovery which lie open to such
rough observations as can be made without artificial methods, the
great explorers of former times have appropriated most of what is
valuable, and that the gleanings which remain are sought after, rather
for their abstruseness, than for their intrinsic worth.  But the
history of science shews that even during that phase of her progress
in which she devotes herself to improving the accuracy of the
numerical measurement of quantities with which she has long been
familiar, she is preparing the materials for the subjugation of new
regions, which would have remained unknown if she had been contented
with the rough methods of her early pioneers.  I might bring forward
instances gathered from every branch of science, shewing how the
labour of careful measurement has been rewarded by the discovery of
new fields of research, and by the development of new scientific
ideas.  But the history of the science of terrestrial magnetism
affords us a sufficient example of what may be done by Experiments in
Concert, such as we hope some day to perform in our Laboratory.

That celebrated traveller, Humboldt, was profoundly impressed with the
scientific value of a combined effort to be made by the observers of
all nations, to obtain accurate measurements of the magnetism of the
earth; and we owe it mainly to his enthusiasm for science, his great
reputation and his wide-spread influence, that not only private men of
science, but the governments of most of the civilised nations, our own
among the number, were induced to take part in the enterprise.  But
the actual working out of the scheme, and the arrangements by which
the labours of the observers were so directed as to obtain the best
results, we owe to the great mathematician Gauss, working along with
Weber, the future founder of the science of electro-magnetic
measurement, in the magnetic observatory of Gottingen, and aided by
the skill of the instrument-maker Leyser.  These men, however, did not
work alone.  Numbers of scientific men joined the Magnetic Union,
learned the use of the new instruments and the new methods of reducing
the observations; and in every city of Europe you might see them, at
certain stated times, sitting, each in his cold wooden shed, with his
eye fixed at the telescope, his ear attentive to the clock, and his
pencil recording in his note-book the instantaneous position of the
suspended magnet.

Bacon's conception of "Experiments in concert" was thus realised, the
scattered forces of science were converted into a regular army, and
emulation and jealousy became out of place, for the results obtained
by any one observer were of no value till they were combined with
those of the others.

The increase in the accuracy and completeness of magnetic observations
which was obtained by the new method, opened up fields of research
which were hardly suspected to exist by those whose observations of
the magnetic needle had been conducted in a more primitive manner.  We
must reserve for its proper place in our course any detailed
description of the disturbances to which the magnetism of our planet
is found to be subject.  Some of these disturbances are periodic,
following the regular courses of the sun and moon.  Others are sudden,
and are called magnetic storms, but, like the storms of the
atmosphere, they have their known seasons of frequency.  The last and
the most mysterious of these magnetic changes is that secular
variation by which the whole character of the earth, as a great
magnet, is being slowly modified, while the magnetic poles creep on,
from century to century, along their winding track in the polar
regions.

We have thus learned that the interior of the earth is subject to the
influences of the heavenly bodies, but that besides this there is a
constantly progressive change going on, the cause of which is entirely
unknown.  In each of the magnetic observatories throughout the world
an arrangement is at work, by means of which a suspended magnet
directs a ray of light on a preparred sheet of paper moved by
clockwork.  On that paper the never-resting heart of the earth is now
tracing, in telegraphic symbols which will one day be interpreted, a
record of its pulsations and its flutterings, as well as of that slow
but mighty working which warns us that we must not suppose that the
inner history of our planet is ended.

But this great experimental research on Terrestrial Magnetism produced
lasting effects on the progress of science in general.  I need only
mention one or two instances.  The new methods of measuring forces
were successfully applied by Weber to the numerical determination of
all the phenomena of electricity, and very soon afterwards the
electric telegraph, by conferring a commercial value on exact
numerical measurements, contributed largely to the advancement, as
well as to the diffusion of scientific knowledge.

But it is not in these more modern branches of science alone that this
influence is felt.  It is to Gauss, to the Magnetic Union, and to
magnetic observers in general, that we owe our deliverance from that
absurd method of estimating forces by a variable standard which
prevailed so long even among men of science.  It was Gauss who first
based the practical measurement of magnetic force (and therefore of
every other force) on those long established principles, which, though
they are embodied in every dynamical equation, have been so generally
set aside, that these very equations, though correctly given in our
Cambridge textbooks, are usually explained there by assuming, in
addition to the variable standard of force, a variable, and therefore
illegal, standard of mass.

Such, then, were some of the scientific results which followed in this
case from bringing together mathematical power, experimental sagacity,
and manipulative skill, to direct and assist the labours of a body of
zealous observers.  If therefore we desire, for our own advantage and
for the honour of our University, that the Devonshire Laboratory
should be successful, we must endeavour to maintain it in living union
with the other organs and faculties of our learned body.  We shall
therefore first consider the relation in which we stand to those
mathematical studies which have so long flourished among us, which
deal with our own subjects, and which differ from our experimental
studies only in the mode in which they are presented to the mind.

There is no more powerful method for introducing knowledge into the
mind than that of presenting it in as many different ways as we can.
When the ideas, after entering through different gateways, effect a
junction in the citadel of the mind, the position they occupy becomes
impregnable.  Opticians tell us that the mental combination of the
views of an object which we obtain from stations no further apart than
our two eyes is sufficient to produce in our minds an impression of
the solidity of the object seen; and we find that this impression is
produced even when we are aware that we are really looking at two flat
pictures placed in a stereoscope.  It is therefore natural to expect
that the knowledge of physical science obtained by the combined use of
mathematical analysis and experimental research will be of a more
solid, available, and enduring kind than that possessed by the mere
mathematician or the mere experimenter.

But what will be the effect on the University, if men Pursuing that
course of reading which has produced so many distinguished Wranglers,
turn aside to work experiments?  Will not their attendance at the
Laboratory count not merely as time withdrawn from their more
legitimate studies, but as the introduction of a disturbing element,
tainting their mathematical conceptions with material imagery, and
sapping their faith in the formulae of the textbook?  Besides this, we
have already heard complaints of the undue extension of our studies,
and of the strain put upon our questionists by the weight of learning
which they try to carry with them into the Senate-House.  If we now
ask them to get up their subjects not only by books and writing, but
at the same time by observation and manipulation, will they not break
down altogether?  The Physical Laboratory, we are told, may perhaps be
useful to those who are going out in Natural Science, and who do
not take in Mathematics, but to attempt to combine both kinds of study
during the time of residence at the University is more than one mind
can bear.

No doubt there is some reason for this feeling.  Many of us have
already overcome the initial difficulties of mathematical training.
When we now go on with our study, we feel that it requires exertion
and involves fatigue, but we are confident that if we only work hard
our progress will be certain.

Some of us, on the other hand, may have had some experience of the
routine of experimental work.  As soon as we can read scales, observe
times, focus telescopes, and so on, this kind of work ceases to
require any great mental effort.  We may perhaps tire our eyes and
weary our backs, but we do not greatly fatigue our minds.

It is not till we attempt to bring the theoretical part of our
training into contact with the practical that we begin to experience
the full effect of what Faraday has called "mental inertia"--not only
the difficulty of recognising, among the concrete objects before us,
the abstract relation which we have learned from books, but the
distracting pain of wrenching the mind away from the symbols to the
objects, and from the objects back to the symbols.  This however is
the price we have to pay for new ideas.

But when we have overcome these difficulties, and successfully bridged
over the gulph between the abstract and the concrete, it is not a mere
piece of knowledge that we have obtained: we have acquired the
rudiment of a permanent mental endowment.  When, by a repetition of
efforts of this kind, we have more fully developed the scientific
faculty, the exercise of this faculty in detecting scientific
principles in nature, and in directing practice by theory, is no
longer irksome, but becomes an unfailing source of enjoyment, to which
we return so often, that at last even our careless thoughts begin to
run in a scientific channel.

I quite admit that our mental energy is limited in quantity, and I
know that many zealous students try to do more than is good for them.
But the question about the introduction of experimental study is not
entirely one of quantity.  It is to a great extent a question of
distribution of energy.  Some distributions of energy, we know, are
more useful than others, because they are more available for those
purposes which we desire to accomplish.

Now in the case of study, a great part of our fatigue often arises,
not from those mental efforts by which we obtain the mastery of the
subject, but from those which are spent in recalling our wandering
thoughts; and these efforts of attention would be much less fatiguing
if the disturbing force of mental distraction could be removed.

This is the reason why a man whose soul is in his work always makes
more progress than one whose aim is something not immediately
connected with his occupation.  In the latter case the very motive of
which he makes use to stimulate his flagging powers becomes the means
of distracting his mind from the work before him.

There may be some mathematicians who pursue their studies entirely for
their own sake.  Most men, however, think that the chief use of
mathematics is found in the interpretation of nature.  Now a man who
studies a piece of mathematics in order to understand some natural
phenomenon which he has seen, or to calculate the best arrangement of
some experiment which he means to make, is likely to meet with far
less distraction of mind than if his sole aim had been to sharpen his
mind for the successful practice of the Law, or to obtain a high place
in the Mathematical Tripos.

I have known men, who when they were at school, never could see the
good of mathematics, but who, when in after life they made this
discovery, not only became eminent as scientific engineers, but made
considerable progress in the study of abstract mathematics.  If our
experimental course should help any of you to see the good of
mathematics, it will relieve us of much anxiety, for it will not only
ensure the success of your future studies, but it will make it much
less likely that they will prove injurious to your health.


But why should we labour to prove the advantage of practical science
to the University?  Let us rather speak of the help which the
University may give to science, when men well trained in mathematics
and enjoying the advantages of a well-appointed Laboratory, shall
unite their efforts to carry out some experimental research which no
solitary worker could attempt.

At first it is probable that our principal experimental work must be
the illustration of particular branches of science, but as we go on we
must add to this the study of scientific methods, the same method
being sometimes illustrated by its application to researches belonging
to different branches of science.

We might even imagine a course of experimental study the arrangement
of which should be founded on a classification of methods, and not on
that of the objects of investigation.  A combination of the two plans
seems to me better than either, and while we take every opportunity of
studying methods, we shall take care not to dissociate the method from
the scientific research to which it is applied, and to which it owes
its value.

We shall therefore arrange our lectures according to the
classification of the principal natural phenomena, such as heat,
electricity, magnetism and so on.

In the laboratory, on the other hand, the place of the different
instruments will be determined by a classification according to
methods, such as weighing and measuring, observations of time, optical
and electrical methods of observation, and so on.

The determination of the experiments to be performed at a particular
time must often depend upon the means we have at command, and in the
case of the more elaborate experiments, this may imply a long time of
preparation, during which the instruments, the methods, and the
observers themselves, are being gradually fitted for their work.  When
we have thus brought together the requisites, both material and
intellectual, for a particular experiment, it may sometimes be
desirable that before the instruments are dismounted and the observers
dispersed, we should make some other experiment, requiring the same
method, but dealing perhaps with an entirely different class of
physical phenomena.

Our principal work, however, in the Laboratory must be to acquaint
ourselves with all kinds of scientific methods, to compare them, and
to estimate their value.  It will, I think, be a result worthy of our
University, and more likely to be accomplished here than in any
private laboratory, if, by the free and full discussion of the
relative value of different scientific procedures, we succeed in
forming a school of scientific criticism, and in assisting the
development of the doctrine of method.

But admitting that a practical acquaintance with the methods of
Physical Science is an essential part of a mathematical and scientific
education, we may be asked whether we are not attributing too much
importance to science altogether as part of a liberal education.

Fortunately, there is no question here whether the University should
continue to be a place of liberal education, or should devote itself
to preparing young men for particular professions.  Hence though some
of us may, I hope, see reason to make the pursuit of science the main
business of our lives, it must be one of our most constant aims to
maintain a living connexion between our work and the other liberal
studies of Cambridge, whether literary, philological, historical or
philosophical.

There is a narrow professional spirit which may grow up among men of
science, just as it does among men who practise any other special
business.  But surely a University is the very place where we should
be able to overcome this tendency of men to become, as it were,
granulated into small worlds, which are all the more worldly for their
very smallness.  We lose the advantage of having men of varied
pursuits collected into one body, if we do not endeavour to imbibe
some of the spirit even of those whose special branch of learning is
different from our own.

It is not so long ago since any man who devoted himself to geometry,
or to any science requiring continued application, was looked upon as
necessarily a misanthrope, who must have abandoned all human
interests, and betaken himself to abstractions so far removed from the
world of life and action that he has become insensible alike to the
attractions of pleasure and to the claims of duty.

In the present day, men of science are not looked upon with the same
awe or with the same suspicion.  They are supposed to be in league
with the material spirit of the age, and to form a kind of advanced
Radical party among men of learning.

We are not here to defend literary and historical studies.  We admit
that the proper study of mankind is man.  But is the student of
science to be withdrawn from the study of man, or cut off from every
noble feeling, so long as he lives in intellectual fellowship with men
who have devoted their lives to the discovery of truth, and the
results of whose enquiries have impressed themselves on the ordinary
speech and way of thinking of men who never heard their names?  Or is
the student of history and of man to omit from his consideration the
history of the origin and diffusion of those ideas which have produced
so great a difference between one age of the world and another?

It is true that the history of science is very different from the
science of history.  We are not studying or attempting to study the
working of those blind forces which, we are told, are operating on
crowds of obscure people, shaking principalities and powers, and
compelling reasonable men to bring events to pass in an order laid
down by philosophers.

The men whose names are found in the history of science are not mere
hypothetical constituents of a crowd, to be reasoned upon only in
masses.  We recognise them as men like ourselves, and their actions
and thoughts, being more free from the influence of passion, and
recorded more accurately than those of other men, are all the better
materials for the study of the calmer parts of human nature.

But the history of science is not restricted to the enumeration of
successful investigations.  It has to tell of unsuccessful inquiries,
and to explain why some of the ablest men have failed to find the key
of knowledge, and how the reputation of others has only given a firmer
footing to the errors into which they fell.

The history of the development, whether normal or abnormal, of ideas
is of all subjects that in which we, as thinking men, take the deepest
interest.  But when the action of the mind passes out of the
intellectual stage, in which truth and error are the alternatives,
into the more violently emotional states of anger and passion, malice
and envy, fury and madness; the student of science, though he is
obliged to recognise the powerful influence which these wild forces
have exercised on mankind, is perhaps in some measure disqualified
from pursuing the study of this part of human nature.

But then how few of us are capable of deriving profit from such
studies.  We cannot enter into full sympathy with these lower phases
of our nature without losing some of that antipathy to them which is
our surest safeguard against a reversion to a meaner type, and we
gladly return to the company of those illustrious men who by aspiring
to noble ends, whether intellectual or practical, have risen above the
region of storms into a clearer atmosphere, where there is no
misrepresentation of opinion, nor ambiguity of expression, but where
one mind comes into closest contact with another at the point where
both approach nearest to the truth.


I propose to lecture during this term on Heat, and, as our facilities
for experimental work are not yet fully developed, I shall endeavour
to place before you the relative position and scientific connexion of
the different branches of the science, rather than to discuss the
details of experimental methods.

We shall begin with Thermometry, or the registration of temperatures,
and Calorimetry, or the measurement of quantities of heat.  We shall
then go on to Thermodynamics, which investigates the relations between
the thermal properties of bodies and their other dynamical properties,
in so far as these relations may be traced without any assumption as
to the particular constitution of these bodies.

The principles of Thermodynamics throw great light on all the
phenomena of nature, and it is probable that many valuable
applications of these principles have yet to be made; but we shall
have to point out the limits of this science, and to shew that many
problems in nature, especially those in which the Dissipation of
Energy comes into play, are not capable of solution by the principles
of Thermodynamics alone, but that in order to understand them, we are
obliged to form some more definite theory of the constitution of
bodies.

Two theories of the constitution of bodies have struggled for victory
with various fortunes since the earliest ages of speculation: one is
the theory of a universal plenum, the other is that of atoms and void.

The theory of the plenum is associated with the doctrine of
mathematical continuity, and its mathematical methods are those of the
Differential Calculus, which is the appropriate expression of the
relations of continuous quantity.

The theory of atoms and void leads us to attach more importance to the
doctrines of integral numbers and definite proportions; but, in
applying dynamical principles to the motion of immense numbers of
atoms, the limitation of our faculties forces us to abandon the
attempt to express the exact history of each atom, and to be content
with estimating the average condition of a group of atoms large enough
to be visible.  This method of dealing with groups of atoms, which I
may call the statistical method, and which in the present state of our
knowledge is the only available method of studying the properties of
real bodies, involves an abandonment of strict dynamical principles,
and an adoption of the mathematical methods belonging to the theory of
probability.  It is probable that important results will be obtained
by the application of this method, which is as yet little known and is
not familiar to our minds.  If the actual history of Science had been
different, and if the scientific doctrines most familiar to us had
been those which must be expressed in this way, it is possible that we
might have considered the existence of a certain kind of contingency a
self-evident truth, and treated the doctrine of philosophical
necessity as a mere sophism.

About the beginning of this century, the properties of bodies were
investigated by several distinguished French mathematicians on the
hypothesis that they are systems of molecules in equilibrium.  The
somewhat unsatisfactory nature of the results of these investigations
produced, especially in this country, a reaction in favour of the
opposite method of treating bodies as if they were, so far at least as
our experiments are concerned, truly continuous.  This method, in the
hands of Green, Stokes, and others, has led to results, the value of
which does not at all depend on what theory we adopt as to the
ultimate constitution of bodies.

One very important result of the investigation of the properties of
bodies on the hypothesis that they are truly continuous is that it
furnishes us with a test by which we can ascertain, by experiments on
a real body, to what degree of tenuity it must be reduced before it
begins to give evidence that its properties are no longer the same as
those of the body in mass.  Investigations of this kind, combined with
a study of various phenomena of diffusion and of dissipation of
energy, have recently added greatly to the evidence in favour of the
hypothesis that bodies are systems of molecules in motion.

I hope to be able to lay before you in the course of the term some of
the evidence for the existence of molecules, considered as individual
bodies having definite properties.  The molecule, as it is presented to
the scientific imagination, is a very different body from any of those
with which experience has hitherto made us acquainted.

In the first place its mass, and the other constants which define its
properties, are absolutely invariable; the individual molecule can
neither grow nor decay, but remains unchanged amid all the changes of
the bodies of which it may form a constituent.

In the second place it is not the only molecule of its kind, for there
are innumerable other molecules, whose constants are not
approximately, but absolutely identical with those of the first
molecule, and this whether they are found on the earth, in the sun, or
in the fixed stars.

By what process of evolution the philosophers of the future will
attempt to account for this identity in the properties of such a
multitude of bodies, each of them unchangeable in magnitude, and some
of them separated from others by distances which Astronomy attempts in
vain to measure, I cannot conjecture.  My mind is limited in its power
of speculation, and I am forced to believe that these molecules must
have been made as they are from the beginning of their existence.

I also conclude that since none of the processes of nature, during
their varied action on different individual molecules, have produced,
in the course of ages, the slightest difference between the properties
of one molecule and those of another, the history of whose
combinations has been different, we cannot ascribe either their
existence or the identity of their properties to the operation of any
of those causes which we call natural.

Is it true then that our scientific speculations have really
penetrated beneath the visible appearance of things, which seem to be
subject to generation and corruption, and reached the entrance of that
world of order and perfection, which continues this day as it was
created, perfect in number and measure and weight?

We may be mistaken.  No one has as yet seen or handled an individual
molecule, and our molecular hypothesis may, in its turn, be supplanted
by some new theory of the constitution of matter; but the idea of the
existence of unnumbered individual things, all alike and all
unchangeable, is one which cannot enter the human mind and remain
without fruit.

But what if these molecules, indestructible as they are, turn out to
be not substances themselves, but mere affections of some other
substance?

According to Sir W. Thomson's theory of Vortex Atoms, the substance of
which the molecule consists is a uniformly dense _plenum_, the
properties of which are those of a perfect fluid, the molecule itself
being nothing but a certain motion impressed on a portion of this
fluid, and this motion is shewn, by a theorem due to Helmholtz, to be
as indestructible as we believe a portion of matter to be.

If a theory of this kind is true, or even if it is conceivable, our
idea of matter may have been introduced into our minds through our
experience of those systems of vortices which we call bodies, but
which are not substances, but motions of a substance; and yet the idea
which we have thus acquired of matter, as a substance possessing
inertia, may be truly applicable to that fluid of which the vortices
are the motion, but of whose existence, apart from the vortical motion
of some of its parts, our experience gives us no evidence whatever.

It has been asserted that metaphysical speculation is a thing of the
past, and that physical science has extirpated it.  The discussion of
the categories of existence, however, does not appear to be in danger
of coming to an end in our time, and the exercise of speculation
continues as fascinating to every fresh mind as it was in the days of
Thales.

Title: Practical Mechanics for Boys

Author: James Slough Zerbe

Release date: August 11, 2007 [eBook #22298]
                Most recently updated: January 2, 2021

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Joe Longo and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRACTICAL MECHANICS FOR BOYS ***




Produced by Joe Longo and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









THE "HOW-TO-DO-IT" BOOKS

PRACTICAL MECHANICS FOR BOYS




THE "HOW-TO-DO-IT" BOOKS

PRACTICAL MECHANICS
FOR BOYS

In language which every boy can understand
and so arranged that he may readily carry
out any work from the instructions given.

WITH MANY ORIGINAL ILLUSTRATIONS

By J. S. ZERBE, M.E.

_Author of_

CARPENTRY FOR BOYS
ELECTRICITY FOR BOYS


M. A. DONOHUE & COMPANY

CHICAGO :: NEW YORK

COPYRIGHT, 1914, BY
THE NEW YORK BOOK COMPANY

Made in U. S. A.




CONTENTS


INTRODUCTORY                                                    Page 1

I. ON TOOLS GENERALLY                                           Page 7

 Varied Requirements. List of Tools. Swivel Vises. Parts of Lathe.
 Chisels. Grinding Apparatus. Large Machines. Chucks. Bench Tools.
 Selecting a Lathe. Combination Square. Micrometers. Protractors.
 Utilizing Bevel Protractors. Truing Grindstones. Sets of Tools. The
 Work Bench. The Proper Dimensions. How Arranged.

II. HOW TO GRIND AND SHARPEN TOOLS                             Page 26

 Importance of the Cutting Tool. The Grinder. Correct Use of Grinder.
 Lathe Bitts. Roughing Tools. The Clearance. The Cutting Angle. Drills.
 Wrong Grinding. Chisels. Cold Chisels. System in Work. Wrong Use of
 Tools.

III. SETTING AND HOLDING TOOLS                                 Page 34

 Lathe Speed. The Hack-saw. Hack-saw Frame. The Blade. Files.
 Grindstones. Emery and Grinding Wheels. Carelessness in Holding Tools.
 Calipers. Care in Use of Calipers. Machine Bitts. The Proper Angle for
 Lathe Tools. Setting the Bitt. The Setting Angle. Bad Practice. Proper
 Lathe Speeds. Boring Tools on Lathe. The Rake of the Drill. Laps. Using
 the Lap. Surface Gages. Uses of the Surface Gage.

IV. ON THE FIRST USE OF THE FILE                               Page 48

 The First Test. Filing an Irregular Block. Filing a Bar Straight.
 Filing Bar with Parallel Sides. Surfacing Off Disks. True Surfacing.
 Precision Tools. Test of the Mechanic. Test Suggestions. Use of the
 Dividers. Cutting a Key-way. Key-way Difficulties. Filing Metal Round.
 Kinds of Files. Cotter-file. Square. Pinion. Half-round. Round.
 Triangular. Equalizing. Cross. Slitting. Character of File Tooth.
 Double Cut. Float-cut. Rasp Cut. Holding the File. Injuring Files.
 Drawing Back the File.

V. HOW TO COMMENCE WORK                                        Page 61

 Familiarity with Tools. File Practice. Using the Dividers. Finding
 Centers. Hack-saw Practice. Cutting Metal True. Lathe Work. First
 Steps. Setting the Tool. Metals Used. The Four Important Things.
 Turning Up a Cylinder. Turning Grooves. Disks. Lathe Speeds.

VI. ILLUSTRATING SOME OF THE FUNDAMENTAL DEVICES               Page 68

 Belt Lacing. Gears. Crown Wheel. Grooved Friction Gearing. A Valve
 which Closes by the Water Pressure. Cone Pulleys. Universal Joint.
 Trammel for Making Ellipses. Escapements. Simple Device to Prevent a
 Wheel or Shaft from Turning Back. Racks and Pinions. Mutilated Gears.
 Simple Shaft Coupling. Clutches. Ball and Socket Joints. Tripping
 Devices. Anchor Bolt. Lazy Tongs. Disk Shears. Wabble Saw. Crank Motion
 by a Slotted Yoke. Continuous Feed by Motion of a Lever. Crank Motion.
 Ratchet Head. Bench Clamp. Helico-volute Spring. Double helico-volute.
 Helical Spring. Single Volute Helix Spring. Flat Spiral, or Convolute.
 Eccentric Rod and Strap. Anti-dead Center for Lathe.

VII. PROPERTIES OF MATERIALS                                   Page 79

 Elasticity. Traction. Torsion. Flexure. Tenacity. The Most Tenacious
 Metal. Ductility. Malleability. Hardness. Alloys. Resistance.
 Persistence. Conductivity. Equalization. Reciprocity. Molecular Forces.
 Attraction. Cohesion. Adhesion. Affinity. Porosity. Compressibility.
 Elasticity. Inertia. Momentum. Weight. Centripetal Force. Centrifugal
 Force. Capillary Attraction. The Sap of Trees. Sound. Acoustics. Sound
 Mediums. Vibration. Velocity of Sound. Sound Reflections. Resonance.
 Echos. Speaking Trumpet. The Stethoscope. The Vitascope. The
 Phonautograph. The Phonograph. Light. The Corpuscular Theory.
 Undulatory Theory. Luminous Bodies. Velocity of Light. Reflection.
 Refraction. Colors. The Spectroscope. The Rainbow. Heat. Expansion.

VIII. HOW DRAUGHTING BECOMES A VALUABLE AID                    Page 95

 Lines in Drawing. Shading. Direction of Shade. Perspectives. The Most
 Pronounced Lines. Direction of Light. Scale Drawings. Degree, and What
 it Means. Memorizing Angles. Section Lining. Making Ellipses and
 Irregular Curves. Focal Points. Isometric and Perspective. The
 Protractor. Suggestions in Drawing. Holding the Pen. Inks. Tracing
 Cloth. Detail Paper. How to Proceed. Indicating Material by Section
 Lines.

IX. TREATMENT AND USE OF METALS                               Page 112

 Annealing. Toughness and Elasticity. The Process. Tempering. Tempering
 Contrasted with Annealing. Materials Used. Gradual Tempering. Fluxing.
 Uniting Metals. Alloying Method. Welding. Sweating. Welding Compounds.
 Oxidation. Soldering. Soft Solder. Hard Solder. Spelter. Soldering
 Acid. The Soldering Iron.

X. ON GEARING, AND HOW ORDERED                                Page 121

 Spur and Pinion. Measuring a Gear. Pitch. Diametral Pitch. Circular
 Pitch. How to Order a Gear. Bevel and Miter Gears. Drawing Gears.
 Sprocket Wheels.

XI. MECHANICAL POWER                                          Page 128

 The Lever. Wrong Inferences from Use of Lever. The Lever Principle.
 Powers vs. Distance Traveled. Power vs. Loss of Time. Wrongly-Directed
 Energy. The Lever and the Pulley. Sources of Power. Water Power.
 Calculating Fuel Energy. The Pressure or Head. Fuels. Power from Winds.
 Speed of Wind and Pressure. Varying Degrees of Pressure. Power from
 Waves and Tides. A Profitable Field.

XII. ON MEASURES                                              Page 139

 Horse Power. Foot Pounds. Energy. How to Find Out the Power Developed.
 The Test. Calculations. The Foot Measure. Weight. The Gallon. The
 Metric System. Basis of Measurement. Metrical Table, Showing
 Measurements in Feet and Inches.

XIII. USEFUL INFORMATION FOR THE WORKSHOP                     Page 148

 Finding the Circumference of a Circle. Diameter of a Circle. Area of a
 Circle. Area of a Triangle. Surface of a Ball. Solidity of a Sphere.
 Contents of a Cone. Capacity of a Pipe. Capacity of Tanks. To Toughen
 Aluminum. Amalgams. Prevent Boiler Scaling. Diamond Test. Making Glue
 Insoluble in Water. Taking Glaze Out of Grindstone. To Find Speeds of
 Pulleys. To Find the Diameters Required. To Prevent Belts from
 Slipping. Removing Boiler Scale. Gold Bronze. Cleaning Rusted Utensils.
 To Prevent Plaster of Paris from Setting Quickly. The Measurement of
 Liquids with Spoons.

XIV. SIMPLICITY OF GREAT INVENTIONS AND OF NATURE'S MANIFESTATION
                                                              Page 152

 Invention Precedes Science. Simplicity in Inventions.
 The Telegraph. Telephone. Transmitter. Phonograph.
 Wireless Telegraphy. Printing Telegraph. Electric Motor.
 Explosions. Vibrations in Nature. Qualities of
 Sound. The Photographer's Plate. Quadruplex Telegraphy.
 Electric Harmony. Odors. Odophone. A Bouquet
 of Vibrations. Taste. Color.

XV. WORKSHOP RECIPES AND FORMULAS                             Page 160

 Adhesives for Various Uses. Belt Glue. Cements. Transparent Cement. U.
 S. Government Gum. To Make Different Alloys. Bell-metal. Brass.
 Bronzes. Boiler Compounds. Celluloid. Clay Mixture for Forges. Modeling
 Clay. Fluids for Cleaning Clothes, Furniture, etc. Disinfectants.
 Deodorants. Emery for Lapping Purposes. Explosives. Fulminates. Files,
 and How to Keep Clean. Renewing Files. Fire-proof Materials or
 Substances. Floor Dressings. Stains. Foot Powders. Frost Bites. Glass.
 To Frost. How to Distinguish. Iron and Steel. To Soften Castings.
 Lacquers. For Aluminum and Brass. Copper. Lubricants. Paper.
 Photography. Plasters. Plating, Coloring Metals. Polishes. Putty. Rust
 Preventives. Solders. Soldering Fluxes. Steel Tempering. Varnishes.
 Sealing Wax.

XVI. HANDY TABLES                                             Page 178

 Table of Weights for Round and Square Steel. Table of Weight of Flat
 Steel Bars. Avoirdupois Weight. Troy Weight. Apothecaries' Weight.
 Linear Measure. Long Measure. Square Measure. Solid or Cubic Measure.
 Dry Measure. Liquid Measure. Paper Measure. Table of Temperatures.
 Strength of Various Metals. Freezing Mixtures. Ignition Temperatures.
 Power and Heat Equivalents.

XVII. INVENTIONS AND PATENTS, AND INFORMATION ABOUT THE
      RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF INVENTORS AND WORKMEN,
                                                              Page 188

 The Machinist's Opportunities. What is an Inventor? Idea Not Invention.
 What an Invention Must Have. Obligation of the Model Builder. Paying
 for Developing Devices. Time for Filing an Application. Selling an
 Unpatented Invention. Joint Inventors. Joint Owners Not Partners.
 Partnerships in Patents. Form of Protection Issued by the Government.
 Life of a Patent. Interference Proceedings. Concurrent Applications.
 Granting Interference. Steps in Interference. First Sketches. First
 Model. First Operative Machine. Preliminary Statements. Proving
 Invention. What Patents Are Issued For. Owner's Rights. Divided and
 Undivided Patents. Assignments. How Made. What an Invention Must Have.
 Basis for Granting Patent in the United States. Reasons for Granting
 Abroad. Original Grants of Patents. International Agreement.
 Application for Patents. Course of Procedure. Costs. Filing a Matter of
 Secrecy.




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

  FIG.                                                            PAGE
   1. Bench vise                                                     8
   2. Pipe grip for vise                                             9
   3. Swivel vise                                                   10
   4. Speed lathe                                                   11
   5. Calipers                                                      12
   6. Engine lathe                                                  13
   7. Center gage                                                   14
   8. Pocket screw and wire gage                                    15
   9. Handy bench vise                                              16
  10. Combination square                                            17
  11. Uses of the combination square                                18
  12. A quick adjusting micrometer                                  19
  13. Universal bevel protractor                                    20
  14. Uses of universal bevel protractor                            21
  15. Grindstone truing device                                      22
  16. Set of tools and case                                         23
  17. The work bench                                                24
  18. Hook tool                                                     28
  19. Parting tool                                                  28
  20. Knife tool                                                    28
  21. Right-hand side tool                                          28
  22. Internal tool                                                 28
  23. Left-hand side tool                                           28
  24. Tool for wrought iron                                         29
  25. Tool for cast iron                                            29
  26. End view of drill                                             31
  27. Side view of drill                                            31
  28. Hack-saw frame                                                35
  29. Hack-saw blade                                                35
  30. Plain hook tool                                               38
  31. Plain straight tool                                           38
  32. Proper angles for tools                                       39
  33. Angles for tools                                              39
  34. Angles for tools                                              39
  35. Set of the bitt                                               40
  36. Correct angle                                                 41
  37. Wrong angle                                                   41
  38. Too low                                                       42
  39. Improper set                                                  42
  40. Internal set                                                  43
  41. Set for brass                                                 43
  42. Surface gage                                                  44
  43. Uses of surface gage                                          46
  44. Rounded surface                                               49
  45. Winding surface                                               49
  46. Hexagon nut                                                   51
  47. Laying off hexagon nut                                        51
  48. Cutting key-way                                               52
  49. Key-seat rule                                                 54
  50. Filing metal round                                            54
  51. Filing metal round                                            54
  52. Making a round bearing                                        55
  53. Making a round bearing                                        55
  54. Cross section of file                                         56
  55. Files                                                         58
  56. Correct file movement                                         59
  57. Incorrect file movement                                       60
  58. Belt lacing                                                   69
  59. Belt lacing                                                   69
  60. Belt lacing                                                   69
  61. Belt lacing                                                   69
  62. Bevel gears                                                   71
  63. Miter gears                                                   71
  64. Crown wheel                                                   71
  65. Grooved friction gears                                        71
  66. Valve                                                         71
  67. Cone pulleys                                                  71
  68. Universal joint                                               71
  69. Trammel                                                       73
  70. Escapement                                                    73
  71. Device for holding wheel                                      73
  72. Rack and pinion                                               73
  73. Mutilated gears                                               73
  74. Shaft coupling                                                73
  75. Clutches                                                      75
  76. Ball and socket joints                                        75
  77. Fastening ball                                                75
  78. Tripping devices                                              75
  79. Anchor bolt                                                   75
  80. Lazy tongs                                                    75
  81. Disc shears                                                   75
  82. Wabble saw                                                    76
  83. Continuous crank motion                                       76
  84. Continues feed                                                76
  85. Crank motion                                                  76
  86. Ratchet head                                                  76
  87. Bench clamp                                                   76
  88. Helico-volute spring                                          77
  89. Double helico-volute                                          77
  90. Helical spring                                                77
  91. Single volute-helix                                           77
  92. Flat spiral or convolute                                      77
  93. Eccentric rod or strap                                        77
  94. Anti dead-centers for lathes                                  77
  95. Plain circle                                                  95
  96. Ring                                                          96
  97. Raised surface                                                96
  98. Sphere                                                        96
  99. Depressed surface                                             96
 100. Concave                                                       97
 101. Forms of cubical outlines                                     98
 102. Forms of cubical outlines                                     98
 103. Forms of cubical outlines                                     98
 104. Forms of cubical outlines                                     98
 105. Shading edges                                                 99
 106. Shading edges                                                 99
 107. Illustrating heavy lines                                     100
 108. Illustrating heavy lines                                     100
 109. Lines on plain surfaces                                      101
 110. Lines on plain surfaces                                      101
 111. Illustrating degrees                                         102
 112. Section lining                                               103
 113. Drawing an ellipse                                           104
 114. Perspective at angles                                        106
 115. Perspective of cube                                          107
 116. Perspective of cube                                          107
 117. Perspective of cube                                          107
 118. Protractor                                                   108
 119. Using the protractor                                         109
 120. Section-lining metals                                        110
 121. Spur gears                                                   122
 122. Miter gear pitch                                             123
 123. Bevel gears                                                  124
 124. Laying of miter gears                                        125
 125. Sprocket wheel                                               128
 126. Simple lever                                                 129
 127. Lever action                                                 130
 128. The pulley                                                   132
 129. Change of direction                                          133
 130. Change of direction                                          133
 131. Steam pressure                                               135
 132. Water pressure                                               135
 133. Prony brake                                                  141
 134. Speed indicator                                              142




PRACTICAL MECHANICS FOR BOYS




INTRODUCTORY


The American method of teaching the mechanical arts has some
disadvantages, as compared with the apprentice system followed in
England, and very largely on the continent.

It is too often the case that here a boy or a young man begins work in a
machine shop, not for the avowed purpose of learning the trade, but
simply as a helper, with no other object in view than to get his weekly
wages.

Abroad, the plan is one which, for various reasons, could not be
tolerated here. There he is bound for a certain term of years, and with
the prime object of teaching him to become an artisan. More often than
otherwise he pays for this privilege, and he knows it is incumbent on
him "to make good" right from the start.

He labors under the disadvantage, however, that he has a certain tenure,
and in that course he is not pushed forward from one step to the next on
account of any merit of his own. His advancement is fixed by the time he
has put in at each part of the work, and thus no note is taken of his
individuality.

Here the boy rises step after step by virtue of his own qualifications,
and we recognize that one boy has the capacity to learn faster than
another. If he can learn in one year what it requires three in another
to acquire, in order to do it as perfectly, it is an injury to the apt
workman to be held back and deterred from making his way upwardly.

It may be urged that the apprentice system instills thoroughness. This
may be true; but it also does another thing: It makes the man a mere
machine. The true workman is a thinker. He is ever on the alert to find
easier, quicker and more efficient means for doing certain work.

What is called "Efficiency" in labor methods, can never obtain in an
apprenticeship system for this reason. In a certain operation, where
twelve motions are required to do a certain thing, and a minute to
perform the twelve operations, a simplified way, necessitating only
eight motions, means a difference in saving one-third of the time. The
nineteen hundred fewer particular movements in a day's work, being a
less strain on the operator, both physically and mentally, to say
nothing whatever of the advantages which the proprietor of the shop
would gain.

I make this a leading text in the presentation of this book; namely,
that individual merit and stimulus is something of such extreme
importance that it should be made the keynote for every boy who tries to
become a mechanic.

The machinist easily occupies a leading place in the multitude of trades
and occupations. There is hardly an article of use but comes to the
market through his hands. His labor is most diverse, and in his
employment doing machine work he is called upon to do things which vary
widely in their character.

These require special knowledge, particular tools, and more frequently
than otherwise, a high order of inventive ability to enable him to
accomplish the task.

The boy should be taught, at the outset, that certain things must be
learned thoroughly, and that habits in a machine shop can be bad as well
as good. When he once becomes accustomed to putting a tool back in its
rightful place the moment he is through with it, he has taken a long
step toward efficiency.

When he grasps a tool and presents it to the work without turning it
over several times, or has acquired the knack of picking up the right
tool at the proper place, he is making strides in the direction of
becoming a rapid and skilled workman.

These, and many other things of like import, will require our attention
throughout the various chapters.

It is not the intention of the book to make every boy who reads and
studies it, a machinist; nor have we any desire to present a lot of
useful articles as samples of what to make. The object is to show the
boy what are the requirements necessary to make him a machinist; how to
hold, handle, sharpen and grind the various tools; the proper ones to
use for each particular character of work; how the various machines are
handled and cared for; the best materials to use; and suggest the
numerous things which can be done in a shop which will pave the way for
making his work pleasant as well as profitable.

It also analyzes the manner in which the job is laid out; how to set the
tools to get the most effective work; and explains what is meant by
making a finished piece of workmanship. These things, properly acquired,
each must determine in his own mind whether he is adapted to follow up
the work.

Over and above all, we shall try to give the boy some stimulus for his
work. Unless he takes an interest in what he is doing, he will never
become an artisan in the true sense of the word.

Go through the book, and see whether, here and there, you do not get
some glimpses of what it means to take a pleasure in doing each
particular thing, and you will find in every instance that it is a
satisfaction because you have learned to perform it with ease.

I do not know of anything which has done as much to advance the arts and
manufactures, during the last century, as the universal desire to
improve the form, shape and structure of tools; and the effort to invent
new ones. This finds its reflection everywhere in the production of new
and improved products.

In this particular I have been led to formulate a homely sentence which
expresses the idea: Invention consists in doing an old thing a new way;
or a new thing any way.

THE AUTHOR.




CHAPTER I

ON TOOLS GENERALLY


Judging from the favorable comments of educators, on the general
arrangement of the subject matter in the work on "Carpentry for Boys," I
am disposed to follow that plan in this book in so far as it pertains to
tools.

In this field, as in "Carpentry," I do not find any guide which is
adapted to teach the boy the fundamentals of mechanics. Writers usually
overlook the fact, that as the boy knows nothing whatever about the
subject, he could not be expected to know anything about tools.

To describe them gives a start in the education, but it is far short of
what is necessary for one in his condition. If he is told that the
chisel or bit for a lathe has a diamond point, or is round-nosed, and
must be ground at a certain angle, he naturally wants to know, as all
boys do, _why_ it should be at that angle.

So in the setting of the tools with relation to the work, the holding
and manipulation of the file, of the drill for accurate boring, together
with numerous little things, are all taken for granted, and the boy
blunders along with the ultimate object in sight, without having the
pathway cleared so he may readily reach the goal.

VARIED REQUIREMENTS.--The machinist's trade is one which requires the
most varied tools of all occupations, and they are by all odds the most
expensive to be found in the entire list of vocations.

[Illustration: _Fig. 1. Bench Vise._]

This arises from the fact that he must work with the most stubborn of
all materials. He finds resistance at every step in bringing forth a
product.

LIST OF TOOLS.--With a view of familiarizing the boy with this great
variety the following list is compiled, from which we shall select the
ones essential in the initial equipment of a small shop.

VISES.--One small, good vise is infinitely preferable to two bad ones.
For ordinary work a 3-inch jaw is preferable, and it should be firmly
mounted on the bench. So many kinds are now made that it would be a
costly thing to purchase one for each special use, therefore the boy
will find it profitable to make some attachments for the ordinary vise.

[Illustration: _Fig. 2. Pipe Grip for Vise._]

SWIVEL VISES.--A swivel vise is always a good tool, the cost being not
excessive over the ordinary kind. Then a pair of grips for holding pipe,
or round material which is to be threaded, can readily be made.

The drawing (Fig. 2) shows a serviceable pair of grips, made to fit the
jaws of a vise, and will be acceptable in much of the work. Then, the
vise should be provided with copper caps for the jaws to be used when
making up articles which would otherwise be injured by the jaws.

[Illustration: _Fig. 3. Swivel Vise._]

Let us get a comprehensive view of the different kinds of tools
necessary in a fully equipped shop.

PARTS OF LATHE.--The first thing of importance is the lathe, and of
these there is quite a variety, and among the accompaniments are the
slide rest, mandrel, back gear, division plate, angle plate, cone plate
and various chucks.

There must also be change wheels, studs and quadrant plates, self-acting
feed for surfacing and cross slide, and clamping nuts.

Drilling machines, both hand and power, hand and ratchet braces and
breast-drill stocks.

[Illustration: _Fig. 4--Speed Lathe._]

CHISELS.--Chisels of various kinds, for chipping and cross-cutting;
round-nosed, centering, set punches, tommies and drifts.

Back, tee and centering square; bevels, spirit level, inside and outside
calipers, straight edges, rules and surface plates.

Gages for boring, scribing blocks, steel and brass scribes, stocks and
dies, screw-plates, taps for bolts, reamers.

[Illustration: _Fig. 5. Calipers_]

Files for various descriptions, countersinks, frame and hack saws.

GRINDING APPARATUS.--Emery wheel, cloth and paper, paper, flour emery,
polishing powders, laps and buffs, and polishing sticks.

[Illustration: _Fig. 6. Engine Lathe._
 _A. Lathe Bed_
 _B. Rack Gear_
 _C. Live Center_
 _D. Dead Center_
 _E. Dead Spindle_
 _F. Face Plate_
 _G. Feed Screw_
 _H. Train of Gears_
 _I. Head Stock_
 _J. Mandrel_
 _K. Cone Pulley_
 _L. Angle Plate for Tool Holder_
 _M. Tool Post_
 _N. Tail Stock_
 _O. Wheel for Slide Rest Mechanism_
 _P. Locking Lever for Tail Stock._]

Forge, anvils, tongs, swages, punches, bolt tools, hot and cold chisels,
blow-pipe, soldering iron, hard and soft solders, borax, spirits of
salts, oil, resin and spelter.

To this may be added an endless variety of small bench tools,
micrometers, protractors, arbors, collets, box tools and scrapers.

[Illustration: _Fig. 7. Center Gage._]

LARGE MACHINES.--The list would not be complete without the planer,
shaper and milling machine, with their variety of chucks, clamps and
other attachments, too numerous to mention.

The foregoing show what a wonderful variety of articles are found in a
well-equipped shop, all of which can be conveniently used; but to the
boy who has only a small amount of money, a workable set is indicated as
follows:

A small lathe, with an 8-inch swing, can be obtained at a low cost,
provided with a countershaft complete.

CHUCKS.--With this should go a small chuck, and a face-plate for large
work, unless a large chuck can also be acquired. This, with a dozen
tools of various sizes, and also small bits for drilling purposes.

The lathe will answer all purposes for drilling, but small drilling
machines are now furnished at very low figures, and such a machine will
take off a great deal of duty from the lathe.

[Illustration: _Fig. 8. Pocket Screw and Wire Gage._]

As the lathe is of prime importance, never use it for drilling, if you
have a driller, as it always has enough work to do for tuning up work.

BENCH TOOLS.--Of bench tools, a 3-inch vise, various files, center
punch, two hammers, round and A-shaped peons, hack saw, compasses,
inside and outside calipers, screw driver, cold chisels, metal square,
level, straight edge, bevel square, reamers, small emery wheel and an
oil stone, make a fairly good outfit to start with, and these can be
added to from time to time.

Everything in the machine shop centers about the lathe. It is the king
of all tools. The shaper and planer may be most efficient for surfacing,
and the milling machine for making grooves and gears, or for general
cutting purposes, but the lathe possesses a range of work not possible
with either of the other tools, and for that reason should be selected
with great care.

[Illustration: _Fig. 9. Handy Bench Vise._]

SELECTING A LATHE.--The important things about a lathe are the spindle
bearings and the ways for the tool-holder. The least play in either will
ruin any work. Every other part may be defective, but with solidly
built bearing-posts and bearings, your lathe will be effective.

For this reason it will not pay to get a cheap tool. Better get a small,
6-inch approved tool of this kind, than a larger cheap article. It may
pay with other tools, but with a lathe never.

Never do grinding on a lathe. The fine emery, or grinding material, is
sure to reach the bearings; it matters not what care is exercised. There
is only one remedy for this--overhauling.

[Illustration: _Fig. 10.--Combination Square._]

COMBINATION SQUARE.--A tool of this kind is most essential, however
small. It can be used as a try-square, and has this advantage, that the
head can be made to slide along the rule and be clamped at any point. It
has a beveling and a leveling device, as well.

[Illustration: _Fig. 11.--Uses of the Combination Square._]

The combination square provides a means for doing a great variety of
work, as it combines the qualities of a rule, square, miter, depth gage,
height gage, level and center head.

[Illustration: _Fig. 12.--A Quick Adjusting Micrometer._]

The full page illustration (Fig. 11) shows some of the uses and the
particular manner of holding the tool.

MICROMETERS.--Tools of this description are made which will accurately
measure work in dimensions of ten-thousandths of an inch up to an inch.

The illustration (Fig. 12) shows an approved tool, and this is so
constructed that it can instantly be changed and set by merely pressing
the end of the plunger as shown.

[Illustration: _Fig. 13.--A Universal Bevel Protractor._]

PROTRACTORS.--As all angles are not obtainable by the square or bevel, a
protractor is a most desirable addition to the stock of tools. As one
side of the tool is flat it is convenient for laying on the paper when
drafting, as well as for use on the work.

The protractor has a graduated disk, and is adjustable so it can be
disposed at any angle.

[Illustration: _Fig. 14.--Universal Bevel Protractor, showing its
uses._]

All special tools of this kind are serviceable, and the boy should
understand their uses, even though he is not able for the time being to
acquire them. To learn how they are applied in daily use is an education
in itself.

UTILIZING BEVEL PROTRACTOR.--Examine the full-page illustration (Fig.
14), and see how the bevel protractor is utilized to measure the angles
of work, whether it is tapering heads or different kinds of nuts, or end
and side surfacing, and it will teach an important lesson.

[Illustration: _Fig. 15.--Grindstone Truing Device._]

TRUING GRINDSTONES.--Devices for truing up grindstones are now made, and
the illustration (Fig. 15) shows a very efficient machine for this
purpose. It can be applied instantly to the face of the stone, and it
works automatically, without interfering with the use of the stone.

It is frequently the case that an emery wheel will become glazed, due to
its extreme hardness. This is also caused, sometimes, by running it at
too high a speed. If the glazing continues after the speed is reduced,
it should be ground down an eighth of an inch or so. This will, usually,
remedy the defect.

[Illustration: _Fig. 16.--Set of Tools and Case._]

SETS OF TOOLS.--A cheap and convenient set of precision tools is shown
in Fig. 16, which is kept in a neat folding leather case. The set
consists of a 6-inch combination square, complete center punch, 6-inch
flexible steel rule center gage, 4-inch calipers, 4-inch outside caliper
with solid nut, 4-inch inside caliper with solid nut, and a 4-inch
divider with a solid nut.

[Illustration: _Fig. 17. The Work Bench._]

THE WORK BENCH.--This is the mechanic's fort. His capacity for work will
depend on its arrangement. To the boy this is particularly interesting,
and for his uses it should be made full three inches lower than the
standard height.

A good plan to judge of the proper height is to measure from the jaws of
the vise. The top of the jaw should be on a level with the elbows. Grasp
a file with both hands, and hold it as though in the act of filing
across the work; then measure up from the floor to the elbows, when they
are held in that position.

THE PROPER DIMENSIONS.--This plan will give you a sure means of
selecting a height that is best adapted for your work. The regulation
bench is about 38 inches high, and assuming that the vise projects up
about 4 inches more, would bring the top of the jaws about 42 to 44
inches from the floor. It is safe to fix the height of the bench at not
less than 34 inches.

This should have a drawer, preferably near the right-hand end of the
bench. The vise should be at the left side, and the bench in your front
should be free of any fixed tools.

HOW ARRANGED.--Have a rack above the bench at the rear, for the various
tools when not in use, and the rear board of the bench should be
elevated above the front planks several inches, on which the various
tools can be put, other than those which are suspended on the rack
above.

The advantage of this is, that a bench will accumulate a quantity of
material that the tools can hide in, and there is nothing more annoying
than to hunt over a lot of trash to get what is needed. It is necessary
to emphasize the necessity of always putting a tool back in its proper
place, immediately after using.




CHAPTER II

HOW TO GRIND AND SHARPEN TOOLS


It is singular, that with the immense variety of tools set forth in the
preceding chapter, how few, really, require the art of the workman to
grind and sharpen. If we take the lathe, the drilling machine, as well
as the shaper, planer, milling machine, and all power-driven tools, they
are merely mechanism contrived to handle some small, and, apparently,
inconsequential tool, which does the work on the material.

IMPORTANCE OF THE CUTTING TOOL.--But it is this very fact that makes the
preparation of that part of the mechanism so important. Here we have a
lathe, weighing a thousand pounds, worth hundreds of dollars,
concentrating its entire energies on a little bit, weighing eight
ounces, and worth less than a dollar. It may thus readily be seen that
it is the little bar of metal from which the small tool is made that
needs our care and attention.

This is particularly true of the expensive milling machines, where the
little saw, if not in perfect order, and not properly set, will not only
do improper work, but injure the machine itself. More lathes are ruined
from using badly ground tools than from any other cause.

In the whole line of tools which the machinist must take care of daily,
there is nothing as important as the lathe cutting-tool, and the
knowledge which goes with it to use the proper one.

Let us simplify the inquiry by considering them under the following
headings:

1. The grinder.

2. The grinding angle.

THE GRINDER.--The first mistake the novice will make, is to use the tool
on the grinder as though it were necessary to grind it down with a few
turns of the wheel. Haste is not conducive to proper sharpening. As the
wheel is of emery, corundum or other quickly cutting material, and is
always run at a high rate of speed, a great heat is evolved, which is
materially increased by pressure.

Pressure is injurious not so much to the wheel as to the tool itself.
The moment a tool becomes heated there is danger of destroying the
temper, and the edge, being the thinnest, is the most violently
affected. Hence it is desirable always to have a receptacle with water
handy, into which the tool can be plunged, during the process of
grinding down.

CORRECT USE OF GRINDER.--Treat the wheel as though it is a friend, and
not an enemy. Take advantage of its entire surface. Whenever you go into
a machine shop, look at the emery wheel. If you find it worn in creases,
and distorted in its circular outline, you can make up your mind that
there is some one there who has poor tools, because it is simply out of
the question to grind a tool correctly with such a wheel.

[Illustration: _Fig. 18. Hook Tool._]

[Illustration: _Fig. 19. Parting Tool._]

[Illustration: _Fig. 20. Knife Tool._]

[Illustration: _Fig. 21. Right-hand Side Tool._]

[Illustration: _Fig. 22. Internal Tool._]

[Illustration: _Fig. 23. Left-hand Side Tool._]

Coarse wheels are an abomination for tool work. Use the finest kinds
devised for the purpose. They will keep in condition longer, are not so
liable to wear unevenly, and will always finish off the edge better than
the coarse variety.

LATHE BITS.--All bits made for lathes are modifications of the foregoing
types (Figs. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23).

As this chapter deals with the sharpening methods only, the reader is
referred to the next chapter, which deals with the manner of setting
and holding them to do the most effective work.

When it is understood that a cutting tool in a lathe is simply a form of
wedge which peels off a definite thickness of metal, the importance of
proper grinding and correct position in the lathe can be appreciated.

ROUGHING TOOLS.--The most useful is the roughing tool to take off the
first cut. As this type of tool is also important, with some
modifications, in finishing work, it is given the place of first
consideration here.

[Illustration: _Fig. 24. Tool for Wrought iron._ _Fig. 25. Tool for Cast
iron._]

Fig. 24 shows side and top views of a tool designed to rough off wrought
iron, or a tough quality of steel. You will notice, that what is called
the top rake (A) is very pronounced, and, as the point projects
considerably above the body of the tool itself, it should, in practice,
be set with its cutting point above the center.

THE CLEARANCE.--Now, in grinding, the important point is the clearance
line (B). As shown in this figure, it has an angle of 10 degrees, so
that in placing the tool in the holder it is obvious it cannot be placed
very high above the center, particularly when used on small work. The
top rake is ground at an angle of 60 degrees from the vertical. The arc
of the curved end depends on the kind of lathe and the size of the work.

The tool (Fig. 25), with a straight cutting edge, is the proper one to
rough off cast iron. Note that the top rake (C) is 70 degrees, and the
clearance 15 degrees.

THE CUTTING ANGLE.--Wrought iron, or mild steel, will form a ribbon when
the tool wedges its way into the material. Cast iron, on the other hand,
owing to its brittleness, will break off into small particles, hence the
wedge surface can be put at a more obtuse angle to the work.

In grinding side-cutters the clearance should be at a less angle than 10
degrees, rather than more, and the top rake should also be less;
otherwise the tendency will be to draw the tool into the work and swing
the tool post around.

DRILLS.--Holders for grinding twist drills are now furnished at very low
prices, and instructions are usually sent with the machines, but a few
words may not be amiss for the benefit of those who have not the means
to purchase such a machine.

Hand grinding is a difficult thing, for the reason that through
carelessness, or inability, both sides of the drill are not ground at
the same angle and pitch. As a result the cutting edge of one side will
do more work than the other. If the heel angles differ, one side will
draw into the work, and the other resist.

[Illustration: _Fig. 26. End view._ _Fig. 27. Side view._]

WRONG GRINDING.--When such is the case the hole becomes untrue. The
sides of the bit will grind into the walls, or the bit will have a
tendency to run to one side, and particularly if boring through metal
which is uneven in its texture or grain.

Figs. 26 and 27 show end and side views of a bit properly ground. If a
bit has been broken off, first grind it off square at the end, and then
grind down the angles, so that A is about 15 degrees, and be sure that
the heel has sufficient clearance--that is, ground down deeper than the
cutting point.

CHISELS.--A machine shop should always have a plentiful supply of cold
chisels, and a particular kind for each work, to be used for that
purpose only. This may seem trivial to the boy, but it is really a most
important matter.

Notice the careless and incompetent workman. If chipping or cutting is
required, he will grasp the first chisel at hand. It may have a curved
end, or be a key-way chisel, or entirely unsuited as to size for the
cutting required.

The result is an injured tool, and unsatisfactory results. The rule
holds good in this respect as with every other tool in the kit. _Use a
tool for the purpose it was made for_, and for no other. Acquire that
habit.

COLD CHISELS.--A cold chisel should never be ground to a long, tapering
point, like a wood chisel. The proper taper for a wood chisel is 15
degrees, whereas a cold chisel should be 45 degrees. A drifting chisel
may have a longer taper than one used for chipping.

It is a good habit, particularly as there are so few tools which require
grinding, to commence the day's work by grinding the chisels, and
arranging them for business.

SYSTEM IN WORK.--Then see to it that the drills are in good shape; and
while you are about it, look over the lathe tools. You will find that it
is better to do this work at one time, than to go to the emery wheel a
dozen times a day while you are engaged on the job.

Adopt a system in your work. Don't take things just as they come along,
but form your plans in an orderly way, and you will always know how to
take up and finish the work in the most profitable and satisfactory way.

WRONG USE OF TOOLS.--Never use the vise as an anvil. Ordinary and proper
use of this tool will insure it for a lifetime, aside from its natural
wear. It may be said with safety that a vise will never break if used
for the purpose for which it was intended. One blow of a hammer may ruin
it.

Furthermore, never use an auxiliary lever to screw up the jaws. If the
lever which comes with it is not large enough to set the jaws, you may
be sure that the vise is not large enough for your work.




CHAPTER III

SETTING AND HOLDING TOOLS


Some simple directions in the holding and setting of tools may be of
service to the novice. Practice has shown the most effective way of
treating different materials, so that the tools will do the most
efficient work.

A tool ground in a certain way and set at a particular angle might do
the work admirably on a piece of steel, but would not possibly work on
aluminum or brass.

LATHE SPEED.--If the lathe should run at the same speed on a piece of
cast iron as with a brass casting, the result would not be very
satisfactory, either with the tool or on the work itself.

Some compositions of metal require a high speed, and some a hooked tool.
These are things which each must determine as the articles come to the
shop; but there are certain well-defined rules with respect to the
ordinary metals that should be observed.

THE HACK SAW.--Our first observation should be directed to the hand
tools. The hack saw is one of the most difficult tools for the machinist
to handle, for the following reasons:

First, of the desire to force the blade through the work. The blade is a
frail instrument, and when too great a pressure is exerted it bends, and
as a result a breakage follows. To enable it to do the work properly, it
must be made of the hardest steel. It is, in consequence, easily
fractured.

[Illustration: _Fig. 28.--Hack Saw Frame._]

[Illustration: _Fig. 29.--Hack Saw Blade._]

Second. The novice will make short hacking cuts. This causes the teeth
to stick, the saw bends, and a new blade is required. Take a long
sweeping cut, using the entire length of the blade. Do not oscillate the
blade as you push it through the work, but keep the tooth line
horizontal from one end of the stroke to the other. The moment it begins
to waver, the teeth will catch on the metal on the side nearest to you,
and it will snap.

Third. The handle is held too loosely. The handle must be firmly held
with the right hand, and the other held by the fingers lightly, but in
such a position that a steady downward pressure can be maintained. If
loosely held, the saw is bound to sag from side to side during the
stroke, and a short stroke accentuates the lateral movement. A long
stroke avoids this.

The hack saw is one of the tools which should be used with the utmost
deliberation, combined with a rigid grasp of the handle.

FILES.--For remarks on this tool see Chapter IV, which treats of the
subject specially.

GRINDSTONES, EMERY AND GRINDING WHEELS.--A good workman is always
reflected by his grinding apparatus. This is true whether it has
reference to a grindstone, emery, corundum wheel, or a plain oil stone.
Nothing is more destructive of good tools than a grooved, uneven, or
wabbly stone. It is only little less than a crime for a workman to hold
a tool on a revolving stone at one spot.

CARELESSNESS IN HOLDING TOOLS.--The boy must learn that such a habit
actually prevents the proper grinding, not only of the tool he has on
the stone, but also of the one which follows. While it is true that all
artificially made grinders will wear unevenly, even when used with the
utmost care, due to uneven texture of the materials in the stone,
still, the careless use of the tool, while in the act of grinding, only
aggravates the trouble.

Another fault of the careless workman is, to press the bit against the
stone too hard. This cuts the stone more than it wears off the tool, and
it is entirely unnecessary. Furthermore, it heats up the tool, which
should be avoided.

CALIPERS.--A true workman, who endeavors to turn out accurate work, and
preserve his tools, will never test the work with his calipers while the
piece is turning in the lathe. A revolving cast iron disk will cut ruby,
the hardest substance next to the diamond, so it is not the hardness of
the material which resists wear, but the conditions under which it is
used.

CARE IN USE OF CALIPERS.--The calipers may be of the most hardened
steel, and the work turned up of the softest brass, the latter, when
revolving, will grind off the point of the tool, for the reason that the
revolving piece constantly presents a new surface to the point of the
calipers, and when tests are frequently made, it does not take long to
change the caliper span so that it must be reset.

As stated elsewhere, the whole energy of the lathe is concentrated on
the bit or cutting tool, hence, in order to get the most effective work
out of it requires care; first, in grinding; and, second, in setting.

MACHINE BITS.--It does not always matter so much whether you use a
square, pointed, or a round-nosed bit, provided it is properly ground
and set in the tool holder. As a rule, the more brittle the metal the
less the top rake or angle should be.

In the chapter relating to the grinding of tools, references were made
as to the most serviceable bits for the various metals. We are concerned
here with the setting or holding of these articles.

[Illustration: _Fig. 30. Plain Hook Tool_ _Fig. 31. Plain Straight
Tool._]

The two illustrations here given show a pair of plain bits, in which
Fig. 30 represents a hook-shaped formation, and Fig. 31 a straight
grind, without any top rake. The hooked bit would do for aluminum, or
steel, but for cast iron the form shown in Fig. 31 would be most
serviceable.

Then the side bits, such as the round-nosed, Fig. 32 and the square end,
Fig. 33, may be ground hooked, or with a top rake, or left flat.

The too common mistake is to grind the lower or clearance side at too
great an angle. Fig. 34 shows the correct angle, and the dotted line A
illustrates the common tendency to grind the clearance.

THE PROPER ANGLE FOR LATHE TOOLS.--Now there is a reason why the angle
of from 10 to 15 should be maintained in the clearance. The point of the
tool must have suitable support for the work it is required to do, so it
will not chatter or yield in the slightest degree. A bit ground along
the dotted line has a cutting edge which will spring down, and
consequently break or produce a rough surface.

[Illustration: _Fig. 32. Fig. 33. Fig. 34. Proper Angles for Tools_]

Then, again, the angle of the clearance acts as a guide, or rather, a
guard, to prevent the tool from going in too far, as will now be
explained.

SETTING THE BIT.--In order to understand the correct setting, examine
the work A, in Fig. 35.

A is a cylinder being turned up in the lathe, and B the cutting tool,
which approaches it on a horizontal line, C, extending out from the
center of the cylinder A. This setting is theoretically correct, and in
practice has been found most advantageous.

In this case let us assume that the clearance angle D is 15 degrees, as
well as in the following figures.

[Illustration: _Fig. 35. Set of the Bit_]

Suppose we have a piece of tough steel, and the tool holder is raised so
that the point of the tool is at the 15 degree line E, as shown in Fig.
36, in which case the clearance line D is at right angles to the line E.
The line E is 15 degrees above the center line C.

THE SETTING ANGLE.--Now, it is obvious that if the tool should be raised
higher than the line E it would run out of work, because the clearance
surface of the tool would ride up over the surface cut by the edge of
the tool.

If, on the other hand, the tool should be placed lower, toward the line
C, the tendency would be to draw in the tool toward the center of the
work A.

In Fig. 37 the tool has its point elevated, in which case it must be
lowered so the point will touch the work nearer the center line C.

The foregoing arrangement of the tools will be found to be effective
where the material is soft and not too tough as with aluminum.

BAD PRACTICE.--Figs. 38 and 39 show illustrations of bad practice which
should never be resorted to. Fig. 38 shows the tool, held in a
horizontal position, but with its point below the center line C. With
any rough metal the tool could not possibly work, except to act as a
scraper, and if it should be used in that position on cast iron, the
tool itself would soon be useless.

[Illustration: _Fig. 36. Correct Angle_ _Fig. 37. Wrong Angle_]

Fig. 39 is still worse, and is of no value for any purpose except in
polishing brass, where it would be serviceable. It would make a sorry
looking job with aluminum. Brass requires a tool with very little top
rake, and the point should be set near the center line C.

LATHE SPEED.--It is often a question at what speeds to run the lathe for
different work. If you know the speeds of your lathe at low and high
gear, you must also consider the diameter of the work at the cutting
point.

The rule is to have the bit cut from 15 to 20 feet per minute for
wrought iron; from 11 to 18 feet for steel; from 25 to 50 for brass; and
from 40 to 50 for aluminum.

[Illustration: _Fig. 38. Too Low_ _Fig. 39. Improper Set_]

As a result, therefore, if, at low speed, a piece 10 inches in diameter,
runs at the proper speed to cut at that distance from the center, it is
obvious that a piece 5 inches in diameter should ran twice as fast. This
is a matter which time and practice will enable you to judge with a fair
degree of accuracy.

Observe this as a maxim: "Slow speed, and quick feed."

BORING TOOLS ON LATHE.--The lathe is a most useful tool for boring
purposes, better for some work than the drilling machine itself. The
work which can be done better on a lathe than on a drilling machine, may
be classified as follows:

1. When straight and true holes are required.

2. In long work, where the lathe is used to turn up the article, and
where the drilling can be done at the same time.

3. Anything that can be chucked in a lathe.

4. Where the work is long and cannot be fixed in a drilling machine. The
long bed of the lathe gives room for holding such work.

[Illustration: _Fig. 40. Internal Set_ _Fig. 41. Set for Brass_]

THE RAKE OF THE DRILL.--A boring tool requires some knowledge in
setting. It should have a greater top rake than for the outside work,
and the cutting edge should also be keener, as a rule.

[Illustration: _Fig. 42.--Surface Gage._]

In this class of work the material bored must be understood, as well as
in doing outside work.

The hooked tool, Fig. 40, is shown to be considerably above the center
line, and at that point it will do the most effective cutting on steel.
If, on the other hand, brass is operated on there should be no top
rake, as illustrated in Fig. 41, thus assuring a smooth job.

LAPS.--This is a tool which is very useful, particularly for grinding
and truing up the cylinders of internal combustion engines, as well as
for all kinds of bores of refractory material which cannot be handled
with the cutting tool of the lathe.

It is made up of a mandrel or rod of copper, with lead cast about it,
and then turned up true, so that it is but the merest trifle larger than
the hole it is to true up.

USING THE LAP.--The roller thus made is turned rapidly in a lathe, and
the cylinder to be trued is brought up to it and the roller supplied
freely with emery powder and oil. As rapidly as possible the cylinder is
worked over on the roller, without forcing it, and also turned, so as to
prevent even the weight from grinding it unduly on one side.

More or less of the emery will embed itself in the lead, and thus act as
an abrasive. The process is called "lapping."

SURFACE GAGES.--Frequently, in laying out, it is necessary to scribe
lines at a given distance from some part of the work; or, the conditions
are such that a rule, a caliper, or dividers will not permit accurate
measurement to be made.

For such purposes, what is called a surface gage was devised. This is
merely a heavy base, provided with a pivoted upright on which is
mounted a scribe that is held by a clamp so it may be turned to any
angle.

[Illustration: _Fig. 43.--Showing uses of the Surface Gage._]

SURFACE GAGE.--The clamp holding the scriber is vertically movable on
the pivoted upright. By resting the base of the surface gage on the line
to be measured from, and swinging one point of the scriber to the place
where the work is to be done, accuracy is assured. One end of the
scriber is bent, so it can be adapted to enter recesses, or such places
as could not be reached by the straight end.




CHAPTER IV

ON THE USE OF THE FILE


The most necessary tool in a machine shop is a file. It is one of the
neglected tools, because the ordinary boy, or workman, sees nothing in
it but a strip or a bar with a lot of cross grooves and edges, and he
concludes that the only thing necessary is to rub it across a piece of
metal until he has worn it down sufficiently for the purpose.

THE FIRST TEST.--The fact is, the file is so familiar a tool, that it
breeds contempt, like many other things closely associated in life.

Give the boy an irregular block of metal, and tell him to file it up
square, and he will begin to realize that there is something in the
handling of a file that never before occurred to him.

He will find three things to astonish him:

First: That of dimensions.

Second: The difficulty of getting it square.

Third: The character of the surface when he has finished it.

FILING AN IRREGULAR BLOCK.--To file a block of an irregular character so
that the dimensions are accurate, is a good test for an accomplished
workman. The job is made doubly difficult if he is required to file it
square at the same time. It will be found, invariably, that the sides
will not be parallel, and by the time it is fully trued up the piece
will be too small. See Figs. 44 and 45.

Then, unless the utmost care is taken, the flat sides _will not_ be
flat, but rounded.

FILING A BAR STRAIGHT.--The next test is to get the boy to file a bar
straight. He has no shaper or planer for the purpose, so that it must be
done by hand. He will find himself lacking in two things: The edge of
the bar will not be straight; nor will it be square with the side of the
bar.

[Illustration: _Fig. 44. Rounded Surface_ _Fig. 45. A Winding Face_]

FILING BAR WITH PARALLEL SIDES.--Follow up this test by requiring him to
file up a bar, first, with two exactly parallel sides, and absolutely
straight, so it will pass smoothly between the legs of a pair of
calipers, and then file the two other sides in like manner.

SURFACING OFF DISKS.--When the foregoing are completed there is still
another requirement which, though it appears simple, is the supreme
test. Set him to work at surfacing off a pair of disks or plates, say
one and a half inches in diameter, so that when they are finished they
will fit against each other perfectly flat.

A pair of such disks, if absolutely true, will hold together by the
force of cohesion, even in a dry state, or they will, as it were, float
against each other.

TRUE SURFACING.--Prior to about 1850 the necessity of true surfacing was
not so important or as well known as at the present time. About that
period Sir J. Whitworth, an eminent English engineer and mechanic,
called the attention of machinists to the great advantage arising from
true surfaces and edges for all types of machinery, and he laid the
foundation of the knowledge in accurating surfacing.

PRECISION TOOLS.--Due to his energy many precision tools were made, all
tending to this end, and as a result machines became better and more
efficient in every way.

It had this great advantage: It taught the workman of his day how to use
the file and scraper, because both must be used conjunctively to make an
absolutely flat plate.

Contrary to general beliefs, shapers and planers do not make absolutely
accurate surfaces. The test of this is to put together two plates so
planed off. There is just enough unevenness to permit air to get between
the plates. If they were perfectly true they would exclude all air, and
it would be a difficult matter to draw them apart.

TEST OF THE MECHANIC.--To make them perfectly flat, one plate has chalk
rubbed over it, and the two plates are then rubbed together. This will
quickly show where the high spots are, and the file and scraper are then
used to cut away the metal.

[Illustration: _Fig. 46. Fig. 47. Hexagon Nut_]

In England the test of the mechanic used to be determined by his ability
to file a piece of metal flat. It was regarded as the highest art. This
is not the most desirable test at the present time, and it is recognized
that a much severer test is to file a narrow piece exactly flat, and so
that it will not have a trace of roundness, and be square from end to
end.

TEST SUGGESTIONS.--In a shop which does not have the advantage of a
planer or shaper, there are so many articles which must be filed up,
that it is interesting to know something of how the various articles are
made with a file.

To file a hexagon, or six-sided nut will be a good test with a file. To
do this a little study in geometrical lines will save a vast amount of
time. In beginning the work, measure the radius with a divider, and then
step off and make six marks equidistant from each other on the round
surface.

[Illustration: _Fig. 48. Cutting Key-way_]

USE OF THE DIVIDERS.--The distance between each of these points is equal
to the radius, or half the diameter, of the round bar. See Fig. 46,
which shows this. The marks should be scribed across the surface, as
shown in Fig. 47, where the lines show the ends of the facets of the
outside of the nut.

Do not let the file obliterate the lines at the rough cutting, but
leave enough material so you can make a good finish at the line.

CUTTING A KEY-WAY.--Another job you may have frequent occasion to
perform, is to cut a way for a key in a shaft and in a wheel hub.
Naturally, this will be first roughed out with a cold chisel narrower
than the key is to be, and also slightly shallower than the dimensions
of the key.

A flat file should be used for the purpose, first a heavy rough one, for
the first cutting. The better way is to have the key so it can be
frequently tried while the filing process is going on, so that to fit
the key in this way is a comparatively easy task.

KEY-WAY DIFFICULTIES.--But the trouble commences when the groove is
filed for the depth. Invariably, the mistake will be made of filing the
width first, so the key will fit in. As a result, in deepening the
groove the file will contact with the walls, and you have a key-way too
wide for the key.

To avoid this, file the depth, or nearly so, and then with a fine file
cut in the corners in the direction indicated by the dart, Fig. 48.

A proper key is square in cross section. In such a case the depth of the
key-way, at each side wall, is just half the width of the key-way.

An excellent key-seat rule can be made by filing out two right-angled
pieces, as shown in Fig. 49, which can be attached to the ordinary
six-inch metal rule, and this will enable you to scribe the line
accurately for the key-way on the shaft.

[Illustration: _Fig. 49. Key-seat Rule_]

[Illustration: _Fig. 50. Fig. 51. Filing Metal Round_]

FILING METAL ROUND.--It is sometimes necessary to file a piece of metal
round. This is a hard job, particularly where it is impossible to scribe
the end of the piece. Suppose it is necessary to file up a bearing
surface, or surfaces, intermediate the ends of a square bar.

You have in that case four sides to start from, the opposite sides
being parallel with each other, so that you will have two dimensions,
and four equal sides, as shown in Fig. 50.

The first step will be to file off accurately the four corners 1, 2, 3,
4, so as to form eight equal sides or faces, as shown in Fig. 51. If you
will now proceed to file down carefully the eight corners, so as to make
sixteen sides, as in Fig. 52, the fourth set of corners filed down will
make the filed part look like the illustration Fig. 53 with thirty-two
faces.

[Illustration: _Fig. 52. Fig. 53. Making a Bar Round_]

This may be further filed down into sixty-four faces, and a few cuts of
the finishing file will take off the little ridges which still remain.
By using emery cloth, and wrapping it around the bearing portion, and
changing it continually, while drawing it back and forth, will enable
you to make a bearing which, by care, will caliper up in good shape.

KINDS OF FILES.--Each file has five distinct properties; namely: the
length, the contour, the form in cross section, the kind of teeth, and
the fineness of the teeth.

There are nine well-defined shapes for files. These may be enumerated as
follows:

[Illustration: _Fig. 54. Cross Sections of Files._]

No. 1. The cotter file. The small kind is called a verge or pivot file.

No. 2. Square file, which may be tapering from end to end, or have
parallel sides throughout.

No. 3. Watch pinion file. This may have its sides parallel or tapering,
to make a knife-shaped file.

No. 4. Clock-pinion; which may be used for either nicking, piecing, or
squaring-off purposes.

No. 5. Round, with parallel sides for gulleting purposes, or rat-tail
when it tapers.

No. 6. Triangular, or three equally-sided body for saw filing.

No. 7. Equalizing file. This is parallel when used for making
clock-pinions or endless screws; or for slitting, entering, warding, or
making barrel holes, when the body of the file tapers.

No. 8. Cross, or double-round, half-file.

No. 9. Slitting file; which has parallel sides only. A cant file.

CHARACTER OF THE FILE TOOTH.--Files are distinguished principally by the
character of the oblique, or cross grooves and ridges which do the
cutting and abrading when the file is drawn across the surface.

This is really more important than the shape, because the files, by
their cuttings, are adapted for the various materials which they are to
be used upon.

The files are classified as _Double Cut_, of which there are the
_rough_, _middle_, _bastard_, _second cut_, _smooth_, and _dead smooth_.

The _Float Cut_, which is either _rough_, _bastard_ or _smooth_; and

The _Rasp Cut_, either _rough_, _bastard_ or _smooth_.

Several types are illustrated in Fig. 55, which show the characteristics
of the various cuts.

The rasps are used principally for soft material, such as wood or for
hoofs, in horse shoeing, hence they need not be considered in connection
with machine-shop work.

[Illustration: _Fig. 55. Files._]

HOLDING THE FILE.--The common mistake on the part of the beginner is to
drag the file across the work at an angle. The body of the file should
move across straight and not obliquely.

Note this movement in Fig. 56 where the dash shows the correct movement
of the file with relation to the work. Also observe that the file
cutting ridges are not straight across the file, but at an angle to the
direction of the dart.

[Illustration: _Fig. 56. Correct File Movement_]

INJURING FILES.--Now the frequent practice is to use the file as shown
in Fig. 57, in which case it is moved across obliquely. The result is
that the angle of the file cut is so disposed that the teeth of the file
do not properly aid in the cutting, but in a measure retard the
operation.

File teeth are disposed at an angle for the purpose of giving them a
shearing cut, which is the case when the file moves across the work on a
line with its body.

To use a file as shown in Fig. 57 injures the file without giving it an
opportunity to cut as fast as it would when properly used.

[Illustration: _Fig. 57. Incorrect File Movement_]

DRAWING BACK THE FILE.--In drawing back a file it is always better to
allow it to drag over the work than to raise it up. It is frequently the
case that some of the material will lodge in the teeth, and the back
lash will serve to clear out the grooves.

This is particularly true in filing copper, aluminum, lead, and like
metals, but it is well to observe this in all cases.




CHAPTER V

HOW TO COMMENCE WORK


The question is often asked: Where and how shall the novice commence
work?

When the shop is equipped, or partially so, sufficient, at least, to
turn out simple jobs, the boy will find certain tools which are
strangers to him. He must become acquainted with them and not only learn
their uses, but how to use them to the best advantage.

FAMILIARITY WITH TOOLS.--Familiarity with the appearance of tools, and
seeing them in the hands of others will not be of any value. Nothing but
the immediate contact with the tool will teach how to use it.

FILE PRACTICE.--The file is a good tool to pick up first. Select a piece
of metal, six or eight inches long, and follow the instructions laid
down in the chapter relating to the use of the file.

Practice with several kinds and with different varieties of material
will soon give an inkling of the best kind to use with the metal you
have. Use the straight edge and the square while the filing process is
going on, and apply them frequently, to show you what speed you are
making and how nearly true you are surfacing up the piece.

USING THE DIVIDERS.--Then try your hand using the dividers, in
connection with a centering punch. As an example, take two pieces of
metal, each about a foot long, and set the dividers to make a short
span, say an inch or so, and step off the length of one piece of metal,
and punch the last mark. Then do likewise with the other piece of metal,
and see how nearly alike the two measurements are by comparing them.

You will find a variation in the lengths of the two measurements at the
first trials, and very likely will not be able to make the two pieces
register accurately after many trials, even when using the utmost care.

Sooner or later you will learn that you have not stepped paths along the
two bars which were exactly straight, and this will account for the
variations. In order to be accurate a line should be drawn along each
piece of metal, and the dividers should step off the marks on that line.

FINDING CENTERS.--By way of further experiment, it might be well to find
the exact center of the ends of a square bar, putting in the punch marks
and then mounting it in the lathe centers to see how accurately this has
been done.

If either end is out of true the punch marks can be corrected by
inclining the punch, so that when it is struck it will move over the
point in the direction of its true center. This may be followed up by
centering the end of a round bar so as to make it true. This will be
found to be a more difficult job, unless you have a center head, a tool
made for that purpose.

It is good practice, however, to make trials of all this work, as it
will enable you to judge of measurements. It can be done with the
dividers by using care in scribing the centers.

HACK-SAW PRACTICE.--Practice with the hack-saw should be indulged in
frequently. Learn to make a straight cut through a bar. Try to do this
without using a square to guide you. One of the tests of a good mechanic
is ability to judge a straight cut.

The following plan is suggested as a test for the eye. Use a bar of iron
or steel one inch square, and make a cut an eighth of an inch deep
across it; then turn it around a quarter, so as to expose the nest face,
and continue the cut along the side, the same depth, and follow this up
with the remaining two sides, and see how near the end of the first cut
and the finish cut come together. The test will surprise you.

CUTTING METALS TRUE.--When you saw off the end of such a bar for trial
purposes, use a square, after the cut is made, and note how much it is
out of true in both directions. It is a curious fact that most mechanics
are disposed to saw or cut crooked in one direction, either to the right
or to the left. In tests made it is found that this defect is persisted
in.

It is practice only which will remedy this, and it would be well for the
boy to learn this for himself as early in his career as possible, and
correct the tendency to veer in either direction.

The test of sawing around a round bar is also commended. After a few
trials you will be surprised to see how your judgment will improve in
practice.

LATHE WORK.--Learn the uses of the chuck. As you have, probably,
economized as much as possible, a universal chuck is not available,
hence the first experience will be with an independent chuck, where the
three dogs move independently of each other. This will give you some
work to learn how you can get the job true.

Now, before attempting to cut the material, thoroughly learn all the
parts of the feed mechanism, and how to reverse, as well as to cross
feed. Learn the operation of the operative parts so that your hand will
instinctively find them, while the eye is on the work.

FIRST STEPS.--See to it that your tools are sharp, and at the first
trials make light cuts. Practice the feeds by manually moving the tool
holder, for surface cutting as well as for cross cutting.

SETTING THE TOOL.--Set the cutting tool at various angles, and try the
different tools, noting the peculiarities of each, at the different
speeds. Do not, by any means, use refractory metals for your first
attempt. Mild steel is a good test, and a light gray iron is admirable
for practice lessons.

METALS USED.--Brass is good for testing purposes, but the difficulty is
that the tendency of the boy, at first, is to try to do the work too
rapidly, and brass encourages this tendency. Feed slowly and regularly
until you can make an even finish.

Then chuck and re-chuck to familiarize yourself with every operative
part of the lathe, and never try to force the cutting tool. If it has a
tendency to run into the work, set it higher. If, on the other hand, you
find, in feeding, that it is hard to move the tool post along, the tool
is too high, and should be lowered.

THE FOUR IMPORTANT THINGS.--Constant practice of this kind will soon
enable you to feel instinctively when the tool is doing good work. While
you are thus experimenting do not forget the speed. This will need your
attention.

Remember, you have several things to think about in commencing to run
the lathe, all of which will take care of themselves when it becomes
familiar to you. These may be enumerated as follows:

First: The kind of tool best to use.

Second: Its proper set, to do the best work.

Third: The speed of the work in the lathe.

Fourth: The feed, or the thickness of the cut into the material.

TURNING UP A CYLINDER.--The first and most important work is to turn up
a small cylinder to a calipered dimension. When it is roughed down ready
for the finish cut, set the tool so it will take off a sufficient amount
to prevent the caliper from spanning it, and this will enable you to
finish it off with emery paper, or allow another small cut to be taken.

TURNING GROOVES.--Then follow this up by turning in a variety of annular
grooves of different depths and widths; and also V-shaped grooves, the
latter to be performed by using both the longitudinal and transverse
feeds. This will give you excellent practice in using both hands
simultaneously.

The next step would be to turn out a bore and fit a mandrel into it.
This will give you the opportunity to use the caliper to good advantage,
and will test your capacity to use them for inside as well as for
outside work.

DISCS.--A job that will also afford good exercise is to turn up a disc
with a groove in its face, and then chuck and turn another disk with an
annular rib on its face to fit into the groove. This requires delicacy
of measurement with the inside as well as the outside calipers.

The groove should be cut first, and the measurement taken from that, as
it is less difficult to handle and set the tool for the rib than for the
groove.

LATHE SPEEDS.--Do not make the too common mistake of running the mandrel
at high speeds in your initial tests. It is far better to use a slow
speed, and take a heavy cut. This is good advice at all times, but it is
particularly important with beginners.




CHAPTER VI

ILLUSTRATING SOME OF THE FUNDAMENTAL DEVICES


There are numerous little devices and shop expedients which are
desirable, and for which the boy will find uses as he progresses.

We devote this chapter to hints of this kind, all of which are capable
of being turned out or utilized at various stages.

LACING BELTS.--To properly lace a belt is quite an art, as many who have
tried it know. If a belt runs off the pulley it is attributable to one
of three causes: either the pulleys are out of line or the shafts are
not parallel or the belt is laced so it makes the belt longer at one
margin than the other.

In Fig. 58 the lacing should commence at the center hole (A) of one belt
end and lace outwardly, terminating at the hole (B) in the center of the
other belt end, as shown in Fig. 58.

In Fig. 59 the lacing commences at A, and terminates at the hole (B) at
the edge. This will be ample for all but the widest belts.

Fig. 60 is adapted for a narrow belt. The lacing commences at one margin
hole (A), and terminates at the other margin hole (Z).

Fig. 61 shows the outside of the belt.

Fig. 62. GEARS.--This is something every boy ought to know about. Fig.
62 shows a pair of intermeshing bevel gears. This is the correct term
for a pair when both are of the same diameter.

[Illustration: _Inside Fig. 58. Belt Lacing_
 _Outside Fig. 58. Belt Lacing_
 _Fig. 59. Belt Lacing_
 _Fig. 60. Belt Lacing_
 _Fig. 61. Belt Lacing_]

MITER GEARS.--In Fig. 63 we have a pair of miter gears, one being larger
than the other. Remember this distinction.

Fig. 64. CROWN WHEEL.--This is a simple manner of transmitting motion
from one shaft to another, when the shafts are at right angles, or
nearly so, without using bevel or miter gears.

Fig. 65. GROOVED FRICTION GEARING.--Two grooved pulleys, which fit each
other accurately, will transmit power without losing too much by
friction. The deeper the grooves the greater is the loss by friction.

Fig. 66. A VALVE WHICH CLOSES BY THE WATER PRESSURE.--The bibb has
therein a movable valve on a horizontal stem, the valve being on the
inside of the seat. The stem of the handle has at its lower end a crank
bend, which engages with the outer end of the valve stem. When the
handle is turned in either direction the valve is unseated. On releasing
the handle the pressure of the water against the valve seats it.

Fig. 67. CONE PULLEYS.--Two cone pulleys of equal size and taper provide
a means whereby a change in speed can be transmitted from one shaft to
another by merely moving the belt to and fro. The slightest change is
available by this means.

Fig. 68. UNIVERSAL JOINT.--A wheel, with four projecting pins, is placed
between the U-shaped yokes on the ends of the approaching shafts. The
pins serve as the pivots for the angles formed by the two shafts.

Fig. 69. TRAMMEL FOR MAKING AN ELLIPSE.--This is a tool easily made,
which will be of great service in the shop. In a disc (A), preferably
made of brass, are two channels (B) at right angles to each other. The
grooves are undercut, so that the blocks (C) will fit and slide in the
grooves and be held therein by the dove-tailed formation. Each block is
longer than the width of the groove, and has an outwardly projecting pin
which passes through a bar (D). One pin (E) is movable along in a slot,
but is adjustable at any point so that the shape of the ellipse may be
varied. The end of the bar has a series of holes (G) for a pencil, so
that the size of the ellipse may also be changed.

[Illustration: _Fig. 62. Bevel Gears_
 _Fig. 63. Miter Gears_
 _Fig. 64. Crown Wheel_
 _Fig. 65. Grooved Friction Gears_
 _Fig. 66. Valve_
 _Fig. 67. Cone Pulleys_
 _Fig. 68. Universal Joint_]

Fig. 70. ESCAPEMENTS.--Various forms of escapements may be made, but the
object of all is the same. The device is designed to permit a wheel to
move intermittingly or in a step by step movement, by the swinging
motion of a pendulum. Another thing is accomplished by it. The teeth of
the escapement are cut at such an angle that, as one of the teeth of the
escapement is released from one tooth of the escapement wheel, the
spring, or the weight of the clock, will cause one of the teeth of the
escapement wheel to engage the other tooth of the escapement, and give
the pendulum an impulse in the other direction. In the figure, A is the
escapement, B the escapement wheels and _a_, _b_, the pallets, which
are cut at suitable angles to actuate the pendulum.

Fig. 71. SIMPLE DEVICE TO PREVENT A WHEEL OR SHAFT FROM TURNING
BACK.--This is a substitute for a pawl and ratchet wheel. A is a drum or
a hollow wheel and B a pulley on a shaft, and this pulley turns loosely
with the drum (A). Four tangential slots (C) are cut into the perimeter
of the pulley (B), and in each is a hardened steel roller (D). It
matters not in what position the wheel (B) may be, at least two of the
rollers will always be in contact with the inside of the drum (A), and
thus cause the pulley and drum to turn together. On reversing the
direction of the pulley the rollers are immediately freed from binding
contact.

Fig. 72. RACKS AND PINIONS.--The object of this form of mechanism is to
provide a reciprocating, or back-and-forth motion, from a shaft which
turns continually in one direction. A is the rack and B a mutilated
gear. When the gear turns it moves the rack in one direction, because
the teeth of the gear engage the lower rack teeth, and when the rack has
moved to the end its teeth engage the teeth of the upper rack, thus
reversing the movement of the rack.

Fig. 73. MUTILATED GEARS.--These are made in so many forms, and adapted
for such a variety of purposes, that we merely give a few samples to
show what is meant by the term.

[Illustration: _Fig. 69. Trammel_
 _Fig. 70. Escapement_
 _Fig. 71. Device for Holding Wheel_
 _Fig. 72. Rack and Pinion_
 _Fig. 73. Mutilated Gears_
 _Fig. 74. Shaft Coupling_]

Fig. 74. SIMPLE SHAFT COUPLING.--Prepare two similarly formed discs (A,
B), which are provided with hubs so they may be keyed to the ends of the
respective shafts. One disc has four or more projecting pins (C), and
the other disc suitable holes (D) to receive the pins.

Fig. 75. CLUTCHES.--This is a piece of mechanism which is required in so
many kinds of machinery, that we show several of the most approved
types.

Fig. 76. BALL AND SOCKET JOINTS.--The most practical form of ball and
socket joints is simply a head in which is a bowl-shaped cavity the
depth of one-half of the ball. A plate with a central opening small
enough to hold in the ball, and still large enough at the neck to
permit the arm carrying the ball to swing a limited distance, is secured
by threads, or by bolts, to the head. The first figure shows this.

Fig. 77 illustrates a simple manner of tightening the ball so as to hold
the standard in any desired position.

Fig. 78. TRIPPING DEVICES.--These are usually in the form of hooks, so
arranged that a slight pull on the tripping lever will cause the
suspended articles to drop.

Fig. 79. ANCHOR BOLT.--These are used in brick or cement walls. The bolt
itself screws into a sleeve which is split, and draws a wedge nut up to
the split end of the sleeve. As a result the split sleeve opens or
spreads out and binds against the wall sufficiently to prevent the bolt
from being withdrawn.

Fig. 80. LAZY TONGS.--One of the simplest and most effective instruments
for carrying ice, boxes or heavy objects, which are bulky or
inconvenient to carry. It grasps the article firmly, and the heavier the
weight the tighter is its grasp.

Fig. 81. DISC SHEARS.--This is a useful tool either for cutting tin or
paper, pasteboard and the like. It will cut by the act of drawing the
material through it, but if power is applied to one or to both of the
shafts the work is much facilitated, particularly in thick or hard
material.

[Illustration:
 _Fig. 75. Clutches_
 _Fig. 76. Ball and Socket Joints_
 _Fig. 77. Fastening Ball_
 _Fig. 78. Tripping Devices_
 _Fig. 79. Anchor Bolt_
 _Fig. 80. Lazy Tongs._
 _Fig. 81. Disc Shears._]

Fig. 82. WABBLE SAW.--This is a most simple and useful tool, as it will
readily and quickly saw out a groove so that it is undercut. The saw is
put on the mandrel at an angle, as will be seen, and should be run at a
high rate of speed.

Fig. 83. CRANK MOTION BY A SLOTTED YOKE.--This produces a straight
back-and-forth movement from the circular motion of a wheel or crank. It
entirely dispenses with a pitman rod, and it enables the machine, or the
part of the machine operated, to be placed close to the crank.

Fig. 84. CONTINUOUS FEED BY THE MOTION OF A LEVER.--The simple lever
with a pawl on each side of the fulcrum is the most effective means to
make a continuous feed by the simple movement of a lever. The form shown
is capable of many modifications, and it can be easily adapted for any
particular work desired.

[Illustration: _Fig. 82. Wabble Saw_
 _Fig. 83. Continuous Crank Motion_
 _Fig. 84. Continuous Feed_
 _Fig. 85. Crank Motion_
 _Fig. 86. Ratchet Head_
 _Fig. 87. Bench Clamp_]

Fig. 85. CRANK MOTION.--By the structure shown, namely, a slotted lever
(A), a quick return can be made with the lever. B indicates the fulcrum.

Fig. 86. RATCHET HEAD.--This shows a well-known form for common ratchet.
It has the advantage that the radially movable plugs (A) are
tangentially disposed, and rest against walls (B) eccentrically
disposed, and are, therefore, in such a position that they easily slide
over the inclines.

Fig. 87. BENCH CLAMP.--A pair of dogs (A, B), with the ends bent toward
each other, and pivoted midway between the ends to the bench in such a
position that the board (C), to be held between them, on striking the
rear ends of the dogs, will force the forward ends together, and thus
clamp it firmly for planing or other purposes.

[Illustration:
 _Fig. 88. Helico-Volute Spring_
 _Fig. 89. Double Helico-Volute_
 _Fig. 90. Helical Spring_
 _Fig. 91. Single Volute Helix-Spring_
 _Fig. 92. Flat Spiral or Convolute_
 _Fig. 93. Eccentric Rod and Strap_
 _Fig. 94. Anti-Dead Center for Foot-Lathes_]

Fig. 88. HELICO-VOLUTE SPRING.--This is a form of spring for tension
purposes. The enlarged cross-section of the coil in its middle portion,
with the ends tapering down to the eyes, provides a means whereby the
pull is transferred from the smaller to the larger portions, without
producing a great breaking strain near the ends.

Fig. 89. DOUBLE HELICO-VOLUTE.--This form, so far as the outlines are
considered, is the opposite of Fig. 88. A compression spring of this
kind has a very wide range of movement.

Fig. 90. HELICAL SPRING.--This form of coil, uniform from end to end, is
usually made of metal which is square in cross-section, and used where
it is required for heavy purposes.

Fig. 91. SINGLE VOLUTE HELIX-SPRING.--This is also used for compression,
intended where tremendous weights or resistances are to be overcome, and
when the range of movement is small.

Fig. 92. FLAT SPIRAL, OR CONVOLUTE.--This is for small machines. It is
the familiar form used in watches owing to its delicate structure, and
it is admirably adapted to yield to the rocking motion of an arbor.

Fig. 93. ECCENTRIC ROD AND STRAP.--A simple and convenient form of
structure, intended to furnish a reciprocating motion where a crank is
not available. An illustration of its use is shown on certain types of
steam engine to operate the valves.

Fig. 94. ANTI-DEAD CENTER FOR FOOT-LATHES.--A flat, spiral spring (A),
with its coiled end attached to firm support (B), has its other end
pivotally attached to the crank-pin (C), the tension of the spring being
such that when the lathe stops the crack-pin will always be at one side
of the dead-center, thus enabling the operator to start the machine by
merely pressing the foot downwardly on the treadle (D).




CHAPTER VII

PROPERTIES OF MATERIALS


A workman is able to select the right metals because he knows that each
has some peculiar property which is best adapted for his particular use.
These with their meaning will now be explained.

ELASTICITY.--This exists in metals in three distinct ways: First, in the
form of _traction_. Hang a weight on a wire and it will stretch a
certain amount. When the weight is removed the wire shrinks back to its
original length.

Second: If the weight on the wire is rotated, so as to twist it, and the
hand is taken from the weight, it will untwist itself, and go back to
its original position. This is called _torsion_.

Third: A piece of metal may be coiled up like a watch spring, or bent
like a carriage spring, and it will yield when pressure is applied. This
is called _flexure_.

Certain kinds of steel have these qualities in a high degree.

TENACITY.--This is a term used to express the resistance which the body
opposes to the separation of its parts. It is determined by forming the
metal into a wire, and hanging on weights, to find how much will be
required to break it. If we have two wires, the first with a transverse
area only one-quarter that of the second, and the first breaks at 25
pounds, while the second breaks at 50 pounds, the tenacity of the first
is twice as great as that of the second.

To the boy who understands simple ratio in mathematics, the problem
would be like this:

25  4 : 50  1, or as 2 : 1.

THE MOST TENACIOUS METAL.--Steel has the greatest tenacity of all
metals, and lead the least. In proportion to weight, however, there are
many substances which have this property in a higher degree. Cotton
fibers will support millions of times their own weight.

There is one peculiar thing, that tenacity varies with the form of the
body. A solid cylindrical body has a greater strength than a square one
of the same size; and a hollow cylinder more tenacity than a solid one.
This principle is well known in the bones of animals, in the feathers of
birds, and in the stems of many plants.

In almost every metal tenacity diminishes as the temperature increases.

DUCTILITY.--This is a property whereby a metal may be drawn out to form
a wire. Some metals, like cast iron, have absolutely no ductility. The
metal which possesses this property to the highest degree, is platinum.
Wires of this metal have been drawn out so fine that over 30,000 of them
laid side by side would measure only one inch across, and a mile of such
wire would weigh only a grain, or one seven-thousandth of a pound.

MALLEABILITY.--This is considered a modification of ductility. Any
metal which can be beaten out, as with a hammer, or flattened into
sheets with rollers, is considered malleable. Gold possesses this
property to the highest degree. It has been beaten into leaves one
three-hundred-thousandth of an inch thick.

HARDNESS.--This is the resistance which bodies offer to being scratched
by others. As an example, the diamond has the capacity to scratch all,
but cannot be scratched by any other.

ALLOYS.--Alloys, that is a combination of two or more metals, are harder
than the pure metals, and for this reason jewelry, and coins, are
usually alloyed.

The resistance of a body to compression does not depend upon its
hardness. Strike a diamond with a hammer and it flies to pieces, but
wood does not. One is brittle and the other is tough.

The machinist can utilize this property by understanding that velocity
enables a soft material to cut a harder one. Thus, a wrought iron disc
rotating rapidly, will cut such hard substances as agate or quartz.

RESISTANCE.--All metals offer more or less resistance to the flow of an
electric current. Silver offers the least resistance, and German silver
the greatest. Temperature also affects the flow. It passes more easily
over a cold than a warm conductor.

PERSISTENCE.--All metals on receiving heat, will retain it for a certain
length of time, and will finally cool down to the temperature of the
surrounding atmosphere. Some, like aluminum, retain it for a long time;
others, as iron, will give it off quickly.

CONDUCTIVITY.--All metals will conduct heat and cold, as well as
electricity. If one end of a metal bar is heated, the heat creeps along
to the other end until it has the same temperature throughout. This is
called _equalization_.

If a heated bar is placed in contact with another, the effect is to
increase the temperature of the cold bar and lower that of the warm bar.
This is called _reciprocity_.

MOLECULAR FORCES.--_Molecular_ attraction is a force which acts in such
a way as to bring all the particles of a body together. It acts in
three ways, dependent on the particular conditions which exist.

First: _Cohesion_. This exists between molecules which are of the same
kind, as for instance, iron. Cohesion of the particles is very strong in
solids, much weaker in liquids, and scarcely exists at all between the
particles in gases.

Second: _Adhesion_ is that property which exists between the surfaces of
bodies in contact. If two flat surfaces are pressed together, as for
instance, two perfectly smooth and flat pieces of lead, they will
adhere. If, for instance, oil should be put on the surfaces, before
putting them together, they would adhere so firmly that it would be
difficult to pull them apart.

Third: _Affinity_. This is another peculiarity about materials. Thus,
while cohesion binds together the molecules of water, it is chemical
affinity which unites two elements, like hydrogen and oxygen, of which
water is composed.

POROSITY.--All matter has little hollows or spaces between the
molecules. You know what this is in the case of a sponge, or pumice
stone. Certain metals have the pores so small that it is difficult to
see them except with a very powerful glass. Under great pressure water
can be forced through the pores of metals, as has been done in the case
of gold. Water also is porous, but the spaces between the molecules are
very small.

COMPRESSIBILITY.--It follows from the foregoing statement, that if there
are little interstices between the molecules, the various bodies can be
compressed together. This can be done in varying degrees with all
solids, but liquids, generally, have little compressibility. Gases are
readily reduced in volume by compression.

ELASTICITY.--This is a property by virtue of which a body resumes its
original form when compressed. India rubber, ivory and glass are
examples of elasticity; whereas, lead and clay do not possess this
property. Air is the most elastic of all substances.

INERTIA.--This is a property of matter by virtue of which it cannot of
itself change its state of motion or of rest.

Newton's first law of motion is, in substance, that matter at rest will
eternally remain at rest, and matter in motion will forever continue in
motion, unless acted on by some external force.

A rider is carried over the head of a horse when the latter suddenly
stops. This illustrates the inertia of movement. A stone at rest will
always remain in that condition unless moved by some force. That shows
the inertia of rest.

MOMENTUM.--This is the term to designate the quantity of motion in a
body. This quantity varies and is dependent on the mass, together with
the velocity. A fly wheel is a good example. It continues to move after
the impelling force ceases; and a metal wheel has greater momentum than
a wooden wheel at the same speed, owing to its greater mass.

If, however, the wooden wheel is speeded up sufficiently it may have the
same momentum as the metal one.

WEIGHT.--All substances have what is called _weight_. This means that
everything is attracted toward the earth by the force of gravity.
Gravity, however, is different from weight. All substances attract each
other; not only in the direction of the center of the earth, but
laterally, as well.

Weight, therefore, has reference to the pull of an object toward the
earth; and gravity to that influence which all matter has for each other
independently of the direction.

CENTRIPETAL FORCE.--This attraction of the earth, which gives articles
the property of weight, is termed centripetal force--that is, the
drawing in of a body.

CENTRIFUGAL FORCE.--The direct opposite of centripetal, is centrifugal
force, which tends to throw outwardly. Dirt flying from a rapidly
moving wheel illustrates this.

CAPILLARY ATTRACTION.--There is a peculiar property in liquids, which
deserves attention, and should be understood, and that is the name given
to the tendency of liquids to rise in fine tubes.

It is stated that water will always find its level. While this is true,
we have an instance where, owing to the presence of a solid, made in a
peculiar form, causes the liquid, within, to rise up far beyond the
level of the water.

This may be illustrated by three tubes of different internal diameters.
The liquid rises up higher in the second than in the first, and still
higher in the third than in the second. The smaller the tube the greater
the height of the liquid.

This is called _capillary attraction_, the word capillary meaning a
hair. The phenomena is best observed when seen in tubes which are as
fine as hairs. The liquid has an affinity for the metal, and creeps up
the inside, and the distance it will thus move depends on the size of
the tube.

THE SAP OF TREES.--The sap of trees goes upwardly, not because the tree
is alive, but due to this property in the contact of liquids with a
solid. It is exactly on the same principle that if the end of a piece of
blotting paper is immersed in water, the latter will creep up and
spread over the entire surface of the sheet.

In like manner, oil moves upwardly in a wick, and will keep on doing so,
until the lighted wick is extinguished, when the flow ceases. When it is
again lighted the oil again flows, as before.

If it were not for this principle of capillary attraction, it would be
difficult to form a bubble of air in a spirit level. You can readily see
how the liquid at each end of the air bubble rounds it off, as though it
tried to surround it.

SOUND.--Sound is caused by vibration, and it would be impossible to
convey it without an elastic medium of some kind.

_Acoustics_ is a branch of physics which treats of sounds. It is
distinguished from music which has reference to the particular kinds.

_Sounds_ are distinguished from _noises_. The latter are discordant and
abrupt vibrations, whereas the former are regular and continuous.

SOUND MEDIUMS.--Gases, vapors, liquids and solids transmit vibrations,
but liquids and solids propagate with greater velocity than gases.

VIBRATION.--A vibration is the moving to and fro of the molecules in a
body, and the greater their movement the more intense is the sound. The
intensity of the sound is affected by the density of the atmosphere, and
the movement of the winds also changes its power of transmission.

Sound is also made more intense if a sonorous body is near its source.
This is taken advantage of in musical instruments, where a
sounding-board is used, as in the case of the piano, and in the violin,
which has a thin shell as a body for holding the strings.

Another curious thing is shown in the speaking tube, where the sound
waves are confined, so that they are carried along in one line, and as
they are not interfered with will transmit the vibrations to great
distances.

VELOCITY OF SOUND.--The temperature of the air has also an effect on the
rate of transmission, but for general purposes a temperature of 62
degrees has been taken as the standard. The movement is shown to be
about 50 miles in 4 minutes, or at the rate of 1,120 feet per second.

In water, however, the speed is four times greater; and in iron nearly
fifteen times greater. Soft earth is a poor conductor, while rock and
solid earth convey very readily. Placing the ear on a railway track will
give the vibrations of a moving train miles before it can be heard
through the air.

SOUND REFLECTIONS.--Sound waves move outwardly from the object in the
form of wave-like rings, but those concentric rings, as they are
called, may be interrupted at various points by obstacles. When that is
the case the sound is buffeted back, producing what is called echoes.

RESONANCE.--Materials have a quality that produces a very useful result,
called _resonance_, and it is one of the things that gives added effect
to a speaker's voice in a hall, where there is a constant succession of
echoes. A wall distant from the speaker about 55 feet, produces an
almost instantaneous reflection of the sound, and at double that
measurement the effect is still stronger. When the distance is too short
for the reflecting sound to be heard, we have _resonance_. It enriches
the sound of the voice, and gives a finer quality to musical
instruments.

ECHOES.--When sounds are heard after the originals are emitted they tend
to confusion, and the quality of resonance is lost. There are places
where echoes are repeated many times. In the chateau of Simonetta,
Italy, a sound will be repeated thirty times.

SPEAKING TRUMPET.--This instrument is an example of the use of
reflection. It is merely a bell-shaped, or flaring body, the large end
of which is directed to the audience. The voice talking into the small
end is directed forwardly, and is reflected from the sides, and its
resonance also enables the vibrations to carry farther than without the
use of the solid part of the instrument.

The ear trumpet is an illustration of a sound-collecting device, the
waves being brought together by reflection.

THE STETHOSCOPE.--This is an instrument used by physicians, and it is so
delicate that the movements of the organs of the body can be heard with
great distinctness. It merely collects the vibrations, and transmits
them to the ears by the small tubes which are connected with the
collecting bell.

THE VITASCOPE.--Numerous instruments have been devised to determine
the rate of vibration of different materials and structures, the most
important being the _vitascope_, which has a revolvable cylinder,
blackened with soot, and this being rotated at a certain speed, the
stylus, which is attached to the vibrating body, in contact with the
cylinder, will show the number per second, as well as the particular
character of each oscillation.

THE PHONAUTOGRAPH.--This instrument is used to register the vibration of
wind instruments, as well as the human voice, and the particular forms
of the vibrations are traced on a cylinder, the tracing stylus being
attached to a thin vibrating membrane which is affected by the voice or
instrument.

THE PHONOGRAPH.--This instrument is the outgrowth of the stylus forms of
the apparatus described, but in this case the stylus, or needle, is
fixed to a metallic diaphragm, and its point makes an impression on
suitable material placed on the outside of a revolvable cylinder or
disc.

Light.-Light is the agent which excites the sensation of vision in the
eye. Various theories have been advanced by scientists to account for
the phenomenon, and the two most noted views are the _corpuscular_,
promulgated by Sir Isaac Newton, and the _undulatory_, enunciated by
Huygens and Euler.

The _corpuscular_ theory conceives that light is a substance of
exceedingly light particles which are shot forth with immense velocity.
The _undulatory_ theory, now generally accepted, maintains that light is
carried by vibrations in ether. Ether is a subtle elastic medium which
fills all space.

_Luminous_ bodies are those like the sun, which emit light. Rays may
_diverge_, that is, spread out; _converge_, or point toward each other;
or they may be _parallel_ with each other.

VELOCITY OF LIGHT.--Light moves at the rate of about 186,000 miles a
second. As the sun is about 94,000,000 miles from the earth, it takes
8-1/2 minutes for the light of the sun to reach us.

REFLECTION.--One of the most important things connected with light is
that of reflection. It is that quality which is utilized in telescopes,
microscopes, mirrors, heliograph signaling and other like apparatus and
uses. The underlying principle is, that a ray is reflected, or thrown
back from a mirror at the same angle as that which produces the light.

When the rays of the sun, which are, of course, parallel, strike a
concave mirror, the reflecting rays are converged; and when the rays
strike a convex mirror they diverge. In this way the principle is
employed in reflecting telescopes.

REFRACTION.--This is the peculiar action of light in passing through
substances. If a ray passes through water at an angle to the surface the
ray will bend downwardly in passing through, and then again pass on in a
straight line. This will be noticed if a pencil is stood in a glass of
water at an angle, when it will appear bent.

Refraction is that which enables light to be divided up, or analyzed. In
this way white light from the sun is shown to be composed of seven
principal colors.

COLORS.--If the light is passed through a prism, which is a triangularly
shaped piece of glass, the rays on emerging will diverge from each
other, and when they fall on a wall or screen the colors red, orange,
yellow, green, blue, indigo and violet are shown.

The reason for this is that the ray in passing through the prism has the
different colors in it refract at different angles, the violet bending
more than the red.

THE SPECTROSCOPE.--The ability to make what is thus called a _spectrum_,
brought forth one of the most wonderful instruments ever devised by man.
If any metal, or material, is fused, or put in such a condition that a
ray of light can be obtained from it, and this light is passed through a
prism, it will be found that each substance has its own peculiar
divisions and arrangements of colors.

In this way substances are determined by what is called _spectrum
analysis_, and it is by means of this instrument that the composition of
the sun, and the planets and fixed stars are determined.

THE RAINBOW.--The rainbow is one of the effects of refraction, as the
light, striking the little globular particles of water suspended in the
air, produces a breaking up of the white light into its component
colors, and the sky serves as a background for viewing the analysis thus
made.

HEAT.--It is now conclusively proven, that heat, like light, magnetism
and electricity, is merely a mode of motion.

The _mechanical_ theory of heat may be shown by rubbing together several
bodies. Heat expands all substances, except ice, and in expanding
develops an enormous force.

EXPANSION.--In like manner liquids expand with heat. The power of
mercury in expanding may be understood when it is stated that a pressure
of 10,000 pounds would be required to prevent the expansion of mercury,
when heated simply 10 degrees.

Gases also expand. While water, and the different solids, all have their
particular units of expansion, it is not so with gases, as all have the
same coefficient.




CHAPTER VIII

HOW DRAUGHTING BECOMES A VALUABLE AID


The ability to read drawings is a necessary part of the boy's education.
To know how to use the tools, is still more important. In conveying an
idea about a piece of mechanism, a sketch is given. Now, the sketch may
be readable in itself, requiring no explanation, or it may be of such a
nature that it will necessitate some written description.

[Illustration: _Fig. 95. Plain Circle_]

LINES IN DRAWING.--In drawing, lines have a definite meaning. A plain
circular line, like Fig. 95, when drawn in that way, conveys three
meanings: It may represent a rim, or a bent piece of wire; it may
illustrate a disk; or, it may convey the idea of a ball.

Suppose we develop them to express the three forms accurately. Fig. 96,
by merely adding an interior line, shows that it is a rim. There can be
no further doubt about that expression.

Fig. 97 shows a single line, but it will now be noticed that the line is
thickened at the lower right-hand side, and from this you can readily
infer that it is a disk.

SHADING.--Fig. 98, by having a few shaded lines on the right and lower
side, makes it have the appearance of a globe or a convex surface.

[Illustration: _Fig. 96. Ring_
_Fig. 97. Raised Surface_
_Fig. 98. Sphere_]

Shading or thickening the lines also gives another expression to the
same circular line.

In Fig. 99, if the upper and left-hand side of the circle is heavily
shaded, it shows that the area within the circle is depressed, instead
of being raised.

DIRECTION OF SHADE.--On the other hand, if the shading lines, as in Fig.
100, are at the upper left-hand side, then the mind at once grasps the
idea of a concave surface.

The first thing, therefore, to keep in mind, is this fact: That in all
mechanical drawing, the light is supposed to shine down from the upper
left-hand corner and that, as a result, the lower vertical line, as well
as the extreme right-hand vertical line, casts the shadows, and should,
therefore, be made heavier than the upper horizontal, and the left-hand
vertical lines.

[Illustration: _Fig. 99. Depressed Surface_ _Fig. 100. Concave_]

There are exceptions to this rule, which will be readily understood by
following out the illustrations in the order given below.

PERSPECTIVES.--The utility of the heavy lines will be more apparent when
drawing square, rectangular, or triangular objects.

Let us take Fig. 101, which appears to be the perspective of a cube.
Notice that all lines are of the same thickness. When the sketch was
first brought to me I thought it was a cube; but the explanation which
followed, showed that the man who made the sketch had an entirely
different meaning.

He had intended to convey to my mind the idea of three pieces, A, B, C,
of metal, of equal size, joined together so as to form a triangularly
shaped pocket as shown in Fig. 101. The addition of the inner lines,
like D, quickly dispelled the suggestion of the cube.

[Illustration: _Fig. 101. Fig. 102. Fig. 103. Fig. 104.
 Forms of Cubical Outlines_]

"But," he remarked, "I want to use the thinnest metal, like sheets of
tin; and you show them thick by adding the inner lines."

Such being the case, if we did not want to show thickness as its
structural form, we had to do it by making the lines themselves and the
shading give that structural idea. This was done by using the single
lines, as in Fig. 103, and by a slight shading of the pieces A, B, C.

[Illustration: _Fig. 105. Fig. 106. Shading Edges_]

THE MOST PRONOUNCED LINES.--If it had been a cube, or a solid block, the
corners nearest the eye would have been most pronounced, as in Fig. 104,
and the side next to the observer would have been darkest.

This question of light and shadow is what expresses the surface
formation of every drawing. Simple strokes form outlines of the object,
but their thickness, and the shading, show the character enclosed by the
LINES. DIRECTION OF LIGHT.--Now, as stated, the casting of the shadow
downward from the upper left-hand corner makes the last line over which
it passes the thickest, and in Figs. 105 and 106 they are not the
extreme lines at the bottom and at the right side, because of the close
parallel lines.

In Figs. 109 and 110 the blades superposed on the other are very thin,
and the result is the lines at the right side and bottom are made much
heavier.

[Illustration: _Fig. 107. Fig. 108. Illustrating Heavy Lines_]

This is more fully shown in Figs. 107 and 108. Notice the marked
difference between the two figures, both of which show the same set of
pulleys, and the last figure, by merely having the lower and the
right-hand lines of each pulley heavy, changes the character of the
representation, and tells much more clearly what the draughtsman sought
to convey.

SCALE DRAWINGS.--All drawings are made to a scale where the article is
large and cannot be indicated the exact size, using parts of an inch to
represent inches; and parts of a foot to represent feet.

In order to reduce a drawing where a foot is the unit, it is always best
to use one-and-a-half inches, or twelve-eighths of an inch, as the
basis. In this way each eighth of an inch represents an inch. If the
drawing should be made larger, then use three inches, and in that way
each inch would be one-quarter of an inch.

[Illustration: _Fig. 109. Fig. 110. Lines on Plain Surfaces_]

The drawing should then have marked, in some conspicuous place, the
scale, like the following: "Scale, 1-1/2" = 1'"; or, "Scale 3" = 1'."

DEGREE, AND WHAT IT MEANS.--A degree is not a measurement. The word is
used to designate an interval, a position, or an angle. Every circle has
360 degrees, and when a certain degree is mentioned, it means a certain
angle from what is called a _base line_.

[Illustration: _Fig. 111. Illustrating Degrees_]

Look at Fig. 111. This has a vertical line A, and a horizontal line B.
The circle is thus divided into four parts, and where these lines A, B,
cross the circle are the cardinal points. Each of the four parts is
called a quadrant, and each quadrant has 90 degrees.

Any line, like C, which is halfway between A and B, is 45 degrees.
Halfway between A and C, or between B and C, like the line D, is 22-1/2
degrees.

MEMORIZING ANGLES.--It is well to try and remember these lines by fixing
the angles in the memory. A good plan is to divide any of the quadrants
into thirds, as shown by the points E, F, and then remember that E is 30
degrees from the horizontal line B, and that F is 60 degrees. Or, you
might say that F is 30 degrees from the vertical line A, and E 60
degrees from A. Either would be correct.

[Illustration: _Fig. 112. Section Lining_]

SECTION LINING.--In representing many parts of a machine, or article, it
is necessary to show the parts cut off, which must be illustrated by
what is called "section lining." Adjacent parts should have the section
lines running at right angles to each other, and always at 45 degrees.

Look at the outside and then the inside views of Fig. 112, and you will
see how the contiguous parts have the angles at right angles, and
clearly illustrate how every part of the wrench is made. Skill in
depicting an article, for the purpose of constructing it from the
drawing, will make the actual work on the bench and lathe an easy one.

[Illustration: _Fig. 113. Drawing an Ellipse_]

MAKING ELLIPSES AND IRREGULAR CURVES.--This is the hardest thing to do
with drawing tools. A properly constructed elliptical figure is
difficult, principally, because two different sized curves are
required, and the pen runs from one curve into the other. If the two
curves meet at the wrong place, you may be sure you will have a
distorted ellipse.

Follow the directions given in connection with Fig. 113, and it will
give you a good idea of merging the two lines.

First. Draw a horizontal line, A, which is in the direction of the major
axis of the ellipse--that is, the longest distance across. The narrow
part of the ellipse is called the minor axis.

Second. Draw a perpendicular line, B, which we will call the center of
the ellipse, where it crosses the line A. This point must not be
confounded with the _focus_. In a circle the focus is the exact center
of the ring, but there is no such thing in an ellipse. Instead, there
are two focal points, called the _foci_, as you will see presently.

Third. Step off two points or marking places, as we shall term them,
equidistant from the line B, and marked C, C. These marks will then
represent the diameter of the ellipse across its major axis.

Fourth. We must now get the diameter of the minor axis, along the line
B. This distance will depend on the perspective you have of the figure.
If you look at a disk at an angle of about 30 degrees it will be half of
the distance across the major axis.

So you may understand this examine Fig. 114. The first sketch shows the
eye looking directly at the disk 1. In the second sketch the disk is at
30 degrees, and now the lines 2 2, from the eye, indicate that it is
just half the width that it was when the lines 3 3 were projected. The
marks D D, therefore, indicate the distance across the minor axis in
Fig. 113.

[Illustration: _Fig. 114. Perspection in Angles_]

Fifth. We must now find the focal points of the ellipse. If the line A
on each side of the cross line B is divided into four parts, the outer
marks E may be used for the foci, and will be the places where the point
of the compass, or bow pen, is to be placed.

Sixth. Describe a circle F, so it passes through the mark C, and move
the point of the compass to the center of the ellipse, at the star, and
describe a circle line G, from the mark C to the line B. This will give
a centering point H. Then draw a line I from H to E, and extend it
through the circle F.

Seventh. If the point of the compass is now put at H, and the pencil or
pen on the circle line F, the curve J can be drawn, so the latter curve
and the curve F will thus merge perfectly at the line I.

THE FOCAL POINTS.--The focal points can be selected at any arbitrary
point, between C and the line B, and the point H may be moved closer to
or farther away from the line A, and you will succeed in making the
ellipse correct, if you observe one thing, namely: The line I, which
must always run from H to E, and intersects the circle F, is the
starting or the ending point for the small curve F or the large circle
J.

[Illustration: _Fig. 115. Fig. 116. Fig. 117. Perspectives of Cubes_]

ISOMETRIC AND PERSPECTIVE.--A figure may be drawn so as to show an
isometric or a perspective view. Thus, a cube can be drawn so as to make
an isometric figure, as in Fig. 115, where the three sides are equal to
each other.

Isometric means a method of drawing any object in such a manner that the
height, length and breadth may be shown in the proportion they really
bear to each other. Fig. 115 has the sides not only equal to each other,
in appearance to the eye, but they have the same outlines and angles.

Contrast this figure with Figs. 116 and 117. In Fig. 116 two of the
sides are equal in angles and outline; and in Fig. 117 each side has a
different outline, and different angles. Nevertheless, all the cubes
are, in reality, of the same dimension.

THE PROTRACTOR.--This is a most useful tool for the draughtsman. It
enables the user to readily find any angle. Fig. 118 shows an approved
form of the tool for this purpose.

[Illustration: _Fig. 118. Protractor. Section Lining Metals_]

SUGGESTIONS IN DRAWING.--As in the use of all other tools, so with the
drawing instrument, it must be kept in proper order. If the points are
too fine they will cut the paper; if too blunt the lines will be ragged.
In whetting the points hold the pen at an angle of 12 degrees. Don't
make too long an angle or slope, and every time you sharpen hold it at
the same angle, so that it is ground back, and not at the point only.

[Illustration: _Fig. 119. Using the Protractor._]

HOLDING THE PEN.--The drawing pen should be held as nearly vertical as
possible. Use the cleaning rag frequently. If the ink does not flow
freely, after you have made a few strokes, as is frequently the case,
gently press together the points. The least grit between the tines will
cause an irregular flow.

INKS.--As prepared liquid inks are now universally used, a few
suggestions might be well concerning them. After half the bottle has
been used, add a half teaspoonful of water, shake it well, and then
strain it through a fine cotton cloth. This will remove all grit and
lint that is sure to get into the bottle however carefully it may be
corked.

[Illustration: _Fig. 120. Section Lining Metals_]

TRACING CLOTH.--It is preferable to use the dull side of the tracing
cloth for the reasons that, as the cloth is rolled with the glossy side
inside, the figure when drawn on the other side will be uppermost, and
will thus lie flat; and on the other hand, the ink will take better on
the dull side.

If the ink does not flow freely, use chalk, fine pumice stone, or talc,
and rub it in well with a clean cloth, and then wipe off well before
beginning to trace.

DETAIL PAPER.--The detail paper, on which the drawing is first made in
pencil, should show the figure accurately, particularly the points where
the bow pen are to be used, as well as the measurement points for the
straight lines.

HOW TO PROCEED.--Make the circles, curves, and irregular lines first,
and then follow with the straight lines. Where the point of the circle
pen must be used for a large number of lines, as, for instance, in
shading, the smallest circles should be made first, and the largest
circles last, because at every turn the centering hole becomes larger,
and there is liability to make the circles more or less irregular. Such
irregularity will not be so noticeable in the large curves as in the
smaller ones.

INDICATING MATERIAL BY THE SECTION LINES.--In section lining different
materials can be indicated by the character of the lines, shown in Fig.
120.




CHAPTER IX

TREATMENT AND USE OF METALS


ANNEALING.--A very important part of the novice's education is a
knowledge pertaining to the annealing of metals. Unlike the artisan in
wood, who works the materials as he finds them, the machinist can, and,
in fact, with many of the substances, must prepare them so they can be
handled or cut by the tools.

Annealing is one of the steps necessary with all cutting tools, and it
is an absolute requirement with many metals for ordinary use, as well as
for many other articles like glass. This is particularly true in the use
of copper.

TOUGHNESS AND ELASTICITY.--It means the putting of metals in such a
condition that they will not only be less brittle, but also tougher and
more elastic. Many substances, like glass, must be annealed before they
can be put in condition for use, as this material when first turned out
is so brittle that the slightest touch will shatter it, so that it must
be toughened.

Malleable or wrought iron, if subjected to pressure, becomes brittle,
and it is necessary to anneal it. Otherwise, if used, for instance, for
boiler plates, from the rolled sheets, it would stand but little
pressure.

The most immediate use the boy will have is the treatment of steel. He
must learn the necessity of this process, and that of tempering, in all
his cutting tools, and in the making of machinery where some parts are
required to be constructed of very hard metal.

THE PROCESS.--To anneal steel it must be heated to a bright cherry red
and then gradually cooled down. For this purpose a bed of fine charcoal,
or iron filings and lime, is prepared, in which the article is embedded,
and permitted to remain until it is cold.

There are many ways of doing the work, particularly in the use of
substances which will the most readily give up their carbon to the tool.
Yellow prussiate of potash is an excellent medium, and this is sprinkled
over the cherry-heated article to be annealed. The process may be
repeated several times.

TEMPERING.--This is the reverse of annealing as understood in the art.
The word itself does not mean to "harden," but to put into some
intermediate state. For instance, "tempered clay" means a clay which has
been softened so it can be readily worked.

On the other hand, a tempered steel tool is put into a condition where
it is hardened, but this hardness is also accompanied by another
quality, namely, _toughness_. For this reason, the word _temper_, and
not _hardness_, is referred to. A lathe tool, if merely hardened, would
be useless for that purpose.

TEMPERING CONTRASTED WITH ANNEALING.--It will be observed that in
annealing three things are necessary: First, heating to a certain
temperature; second, cooling slowly; third, the particular manner of
cooling it.

In tempering, on the other hand, three things are also necessary:

First: The heating temperature should be a dull red, which is less than
the annealing heat.

Second: Instead of cooling slowly the article tempered is dipped into a
liquid which suddenly chills it.

Third: The materials used vary, but if the article is plunged into an
unguent made of mercury and bacon fat, it will impart a high degree of
toughness and elasticity.

MATERIALS USED.--Various oils, fats and rosins are also used, and some
acids in water are also valuable for this purpose. Care should be taken
to have sufficient amount of liquid in the bath so as not to evaporate
it or heat it up too much when it receives the heated body.

Different parts of certain articles require varying degrees of hardness,
like the tangs of files. The cutting body of the file must be extremely
hard, and rather brittle than tough. If the tang should be of the same
hardness it would readily break.

_Gradual Tempering._--To prevent this, some substance like soap suds may
be used to cool down the tang, so that toughness without hardness is
imparted.

The tempering, or hardening, like the annealing process, may be repeated
several times in succession, and at each successive heating the article
is put at a higher temperature.

If any part of a body, as, for instance, a hammerhead, should require
hardening, it may be plunged into the liquid for a short distance only,
and this will harden the pole or peon while leaving the other part of
the head soft, or annealed.

Glycerine is a good tempering substance, and to this may be added a
small amount of sulphate of potash.

FLUXING.--The word _flux_ means to fuse or to melt, or to put into a
liquid state. The office of a flux is to facilitate the fusion of
metals. But fluxes do two things. They not only aid the conversion of
the metal into a fluid state, but also serve as a means for facilitating
the unity of several metals which make up the alloy, and aid in uniting
the parts of metals to be joined in the welding of parts.

UNITING METALS.--Metals are united in three ways, where heat is used:

First: By heating two or more of them to such a high temperature that
they melt and form a compound, or an alloy, as it is called.

Second: By heating up the points to be joined, and then lapping the
pieces and hammering the parts. This is called forge work or welding.

Third: By not heating the adjacent parts and using an easily fusible
metal, which is heated up and run between the two, by means of a
soldering iron.

The foreign material used in the first is called a flux; in the second
it is termed a welding compound; and in the third it is known as a
soldering acid, or soldering fluid.

The boy is not so much interested in the first process, from the
standpoint of actual work, but it is necessary that he should have some
understanding of it.

It may be said, as to fluxes, generally, that they are intended to
promote the fusion of the liquefying metals, and the elements used are
the alkalis, such as borax, tartar, limestone, or fluor spar.

These substances act as reducing or oxidizing agents. The most important
are carbonate of soda, potash, and cyanide of potassium. Limestone is
used as the flux in iron-smelting.

WELDING COMPOUNDS.--Elsewhere formulas are given of the compounds most
desirable to use. It is obvious that the application of these substances
on the heated surfaces, is not only to facilitate the heating, but to
prepare the articles in such a manner that they will more readily adhere
to each other.

OXIDATION.--Oxidation is the thing to guard against in welding. The
moment a piece of metal, heated to whiteness, is exposed, the air coats
it with a film which is called an _oxide_. To remove this the welding
compound is applied.

The next office of the substance thus applied, is to serve as a medium
for keeping the welding parts in a liquid condition as long as possible,
and thus facilitate the unity of the joined elements.

When the hammer beats the heated metals an additional increment of heat
is imparted to the weld, due to the forcing together of the molecules of
the iron, so that these two agencies, namely, the compound and the
mechanical friction, act together to unite the particles of the metal.

SOLDERING.--Here another principle is involved, namely, the use of an
intermediate material between two parts which are to be united. The
surfaces to be brought together must be thoroughly cleaned, using such
agents as will prevent the formation of oxides.

The parts to be united may be of the same, or of different materials,
and it is in this particular that the workman must be able to make a
choice of the solder most available, and whether hard or soft.

SOFT SOLDER.--A soft solder is usually employed where lead, tin, or
alloys of lead, tin and bismuth are to be soldered. These solders are
all fusible at a low temperature, and they do not, as a result, have
great strength.

Bismuth is a metal which lowers the fusing point of any alloy of which
it forms a part, while lead makes the solder less fusible.

HARD SOLDER.--These are so distinguished because they require a
temperature above the low red to fuse them. The metals which are alloyed
for this purpose are copper, silver, brass, zinc and tin. Various alloys
are thus made which require a high temperature to flux properly, and
these are the ones to use in joining steel to steel, the parts to be
united requiring an intense furnace heat.

SPELTER.--The alloy used for this purpose is termed "spelter," and
brass, zinc and tin are its usual components. The hard solders are used
for uniting brass, bronze, copper, and iron.

Whether soft or hard solder is used, it is obvious that it must melt at
a lower temperature than the parts which are to be joined together.

There is one peculiarity with respect to alloys: They melt at a lower
temperature than either of the metals forming the alloys.

SOLDERING ACID.--Before beginning the work of soldering, the parts must
be cleaned by filing or sandpapering, and coated with an acid which
neutralizes the oxygen of the air.

This is usually muriatic acid, of which use, say, one quart and into
this drop small pieces of zinc. This will effervesce during the time the
acid is dissolving the zinc. When the boiling motion ceases, the liquid
may be strained, or the dark pieces removed.

The next step is to dissolve two ounces of sal ammoniac in a third of a
pint of water, and in another vessel dissolve an ounce of chloride of
tin.

Then mix the three solutions, and this can be placed in a bottle, or
earthen jar or vessel, and it will keep indefinitely.

THE SOLDERING IRON.--A large iron is always better than a small one,
particularly for the reason that it will retain its heat better. This
should always be kept tinned, which can be done by heating and plunging
it into the soldering solution, and the solder will then adhere to the
iron and cover the point, so that when the actual soldering takes place
the solder will not creep away from the tool.

By a little care and attention to these details, the work of uniting
metals will be a pleasure. It is so often the case, however, that the
apparatus for doing this work is neglected in a shop; the acid is
allowed to become dirty and full or foreign matter, and the different
parts separated.




CHAPTER X

ON GEARING AND HOW ORDERED


The technical name for gears, the manner of measuring them, their pitch
and like terms, are most confusing to the novice. As an aid to the
understanding on this subject, the wheels are illustrated, showing the
application of these terms.

SPUR AND PINION.--When a gear is ordered a specification is necessary.
The manufacturer will know what you mean if you use the proper terms,
and you should learn the distinctions between spur and pinion, and why a
bevel differs from a miter gear.

If the gears on two parallel shafts mesh with each other, they both may
be of the same diameter, or one may be larger than the other. In the
latter case, the small one is the pinion, and the larger one the spur
wheel.

Some manufacturers use the word "gear" for "pinion," so that, in
ordering, they call them _gear_ and _pinion_, in speaking of the large
and small wheels.

MEASURING A GEAR.--The first thing to specify would be the diameter. Now
a spur gear, as well as a pinion, has three diameters; one measure
across the outer extremities of the teeth; one measure across the wheel
from the base of the teeth; and the distance across the wheel at a point
midway between the base and end of the teeth.

These three measurements are called, respectively, "outside diameter,"
"inside diameter," and "pitch diameter." When the word _diameter_ is
used, as applied to a gear wheel, it is always understood to mean the
"pitch diameter."

[Illustration: _Fig. 121. Spur Gears_]

PITCH.--This term is the most difficult to understand. When two gears of
equal size mesh together, the pitch line, or the _pitch circle_, as it
is also called, is exactly midway between the centers of the two
wheels.

Now the number of teeth in a gear is calculated on the pitch line, and
this is called:

[Illustration: _Fig. 122. Miter Gear Pitch_]

DIAMETRAL PITCH.--To illustrate: If a gear has 40 teeth, and the pitch
diameter of the wheel is 4 inches, there are 10 teeth to each inch of
the pitch diameter, and the gear is then 10 _diametral pitch_.

CIRCULAR PITCH.--Now the term "circular pitch" grows out of the
necessity of getting the measurement of the distance from the center of
one tooth to the center of the next, and it is measured along the pitch
line.

Supposing you wanted to know the number of teeth in a gear where the
pitch diameter and the diametral pitch are given. You would proceed as
follows: Let the diameter of the pitch circle be 10 inches, and the
diameter of the diametral pitch be 4 inches. Multiplying these together
the product is 40, thus giving the number of teeth.

[Illustration: _Fig. 123. Bevel Gears._]

It will thus be seen that if you have an idea of the diametral pitch and
circular pitch, you can pretty fairly judge of the size that the teeth
will be, and thus enable you to determine about what kind of teeth you
should order.

HOW TO ORDER A GEAR.--In proceeding to order, therefore, you may give
the pitch, or the diameter of the pitch circle, in which latter case the
manufacturer of the gear will understand how to determine the number of
the teeth. In case the intermeshing gears are of different diameters,
state the number of teeth in the gear and also in the pinion, or
indicate what the relative speed shall be.

[Illustration: _Fig. 124. Miter Gears._]

This should be followed by the diameter of the hole in the gear and also
in the pinion; the backing of both gear and pinion; the width of the
face; the diameter of the gear hub; diameter of the pinion hub; and,
finally, whether the gears are to be fastened to the shafts by key-ways
or set-screws.

Fig. 122 shows a sample pair of miter gears, with the measurements to
indicate how to make the drawings. Fig. 123 shows the bevel gears.

BEVEL AND MITER GEARS.--When two intermeshing gears are on shafts which
are at right angles to each other, they may be equal diametrically, or
of different sizes. If both are of the same diameter, they are called
bevel gears; if of different diameters, miter gears.

[Illustration: _Fig. 125. Sprocket Wheel._]

It is, in ordering gears of this character, that the novice finds it
most difficult to know just what to do. In this case it is necessary to
get the proper relation of speed between the two gears, and, for
convenience, we shall, in the drawing, make the gears in the relation of
2 to 1.

DRAWING GEARS.--Draw two lines at right angles, Fig. 124, as 1 and 2,
marking off the sizes of the two wheels at the points 3, 4. Then draw a
vertical line (A) midway between the marks of the line 2, and this will
be the center of the main pinion.

Also draw a horizontal line (B) midway between the marks on the vertical
line (1), and this will represent the center of the small gear. These
two cross lines (A, B) constitute the intersecting axes of the two
wheels, and a line (5), drawn from the mark (3 to 4), and another line
(6), from the axes to the intersecting points of the lines (1, 2), will
give the pitch line angles of the two wheels.

SPROCKET WHEELS.--For sprocket wheels the pitch line passes centrally
through the rollers (A) of the chain, as shown in Fig. 125, and the
pitch of the chain is that distance between the centers of two adjacent
rollers. In this case the cut of the teeth is determined by the chain.




CHAPTER XI

MECHANICAL POWERS


THE LEVER.--The lever is the most wonderful mechanical element in the
world. The expression, _lever_, is not employed in the sense of a stick
or a bar which is used against a fulcrum to lift or push something with,
but as the type of numerous devices which employ the same principle.

Some of these devices are, the wedge, the screw, the pulley and the
inclined plane. In some form or other, one or more of these are used in
every piece of mechanism in the world.

Because the lever enables the user to raise or move an object hundreds
of times heavier than is possible without it, has led thousands of
people to misunderstand its meaning, because it has the appearance, to
the ignorant, of being able to manufacture power.

WRONG INFERENCES FROM USE OF LEVER.--This lack of knowledge of first
principles, has bred and is now breeding, so-called perpetual motion
inventors (?) all over the civilized world. It is surprising how many
men, to say nothing of boys, actually believe that power can be made
without the expenditure of something which equalizes it.

The boy should not be led astray in this particular, and I shall try to
make the matter plain by using the simple lever to illustrate the fact
that whenever power is exerted some form of energy is expended.

In Fig. 126 is a lever (A), resting on a fulcrum (B), the fulcrum being
so placed that the lever is four times longer on one side than on the
other. A weight (C) of 4 pounds is placed on the short end, and a
1-pound weight (D), called the _power_, on the short end. It will thus
be seen that the lever is balanced by the two weights, or that the
_weight_ and the _power_ are equal.

[Illustration: _Fig. 126. Simple Lever_]

THE LEVER PRINCIPLE.--Now, without stopping to inquire, the boy will
say: "Certainly, I can understand that. As the lever is four times
longer on one side of the fulcrum than on the other side, it requires
only one-fourth of the weight to balance the four pounds. But suppose I
push down the lever, at the point where the weight (D) is, then, for
every pound I push down I can raise four pounds at C. In that case do I
not produce four times the power?"

I answer, yes. But while I produce that power I am losing something
which is equal to the power gained. What is that?

[Illustration: _Fig. 127. Lever Action_]

First: Look at Fig. 127; the distance traveled. The long end of the
lever is at its highest point, which is A; and the short end of the
lever is at its lowest point C. When the long end of the lever is pushed
down, so it is at B, it moves four times farther than the short end
moves upwardly, as the distance from C to D is just one-fourth that from
A to B. The energy expended in moving four times the distance balances
the power gained.

POWER VS. DISTANCE TRAVELED.--From this the following law is deduced:
That whatever is gained in power is lost in the distance traveled.

Second: Using the same figure, supposing it was necessary to raise the
short end of the lever, from C to D, in one second of time. In that case
the hand pressing down the long end of the lever, would go from A to B
in one second of time; or it would go four times as far as the short
end, in the same time.

POWER VS. LOSS IN TIME.--This means another law: That what is gained in
power is lost in time.

Distinguish clearly between these two motions. In the first case the
long end of the lever is moved down from A to B in four seconds, and it
had to travel four times the distance that the short end moves in going
from C to D.

In the second case the long end is moved down, from A to B, in one
second of time, and it had to go that distance in one-fourth of the
time, so that four times as much energy was expended in the same time to
raise the short end from C to D.

WRONGLY DIRECTED ENERGY.--More men have gone astray on the simple
question of the power of the lever than on any other subject in
mechanics. The writer has known instances where men knew the principles
involved in the lever, who would still insist on trying to work out
mechanical devices in which pulleys and gearing were involved, without
seeming to understand that those mechanical devices are absolutely the
same in principle.

This will be made plain by a few illustrations. In Fig. 128, A is a
pulley four times larger, diametrically, than B, and C is the pivot on
which they turn. The pulleys are, of course, secured to each other. In
this case we have the two weights, one of four pounds on the belt, which
is on the small pulley (B), and a one-pound weight on the belt from the
large pulley (A).

[Illustration: _Fig. 128. The Pulley_]

THE LEVER AND THE PULLEY.--If we should substitute a lever (D) for the
pulleys, the similarity to the lever (Fig. 127) would be apparent at
once. The pivot (C) in this case would act the same as the pivot (C) in
the lever illustration.

In the same manner, and for like reasons, the wedge, the screw and the
incline plane, are different structural applications of the principles
set forth in the lever.

Whenever two gears are connected together, the lever principle is used,
whether they are the same in size, diametrically, or not. If they are
the same size then no change in power results; but instead, thereof, a
change takes place in the direction of the motion.

[Illustration: _Fig. 129. Fig. 130. Change of Direction_]

When one end of the lever (A) goes down, the other end goes up, as shown
in Fig. 129; and in Fig. 130, when the shaft (C) of one wheel turns in
one direction, the shaft of the other wheel turns in the opposite
direction.

It is plain that a gear, like a lever, may change direction as well as
increase or decrease power. It is the thorough knowledge of these facts,
and their application, which enables man to make the wonderful machinery
we see on every hand.

SOURCES OF POWER.--Power is derived from a variety of sources, but what
are called the _prime movers_ are derived from heat, through the various
fuels, from water, from the winds and from the tides and waves of the
ocean. In the case of water the power depends on the head, or height, of
the surface of the water above the discharging orifice.

WATER POWER.--A column of water an inch square and 28 inches high gives
a pressure at the base of one pound; and the pressure at the lower end
is equal in all directions. If a tank of water 28 inches high has a
single orifice in its bottom 1" x 1" in size, the pressure of water
through that opening will be only one pound, and it will be one pound
through every other orifice in the bottom of the same size.

CALCULATING FUEL ENERGY.--Power from fuels depends upon the expansion of
the materials consumed, or upon the fact that heat expands some element,
like water, which in turn produces the power. One cubic inch of water,
when converted into steam, has a volume equal to one cubic foot, or
about 1,700 times increase in bulk.

Advantage is taken of this in steam engine construction. If a cylinder
has a piston in it with an area of 100 square inches, and a pipe one
inch square supplies steam at 50 pounds pressure, the piston will have
50 pounds pressure on every square inch of its surface, equal to 5,000
pounds.

THE PRESSURE OR HEAD.--In addition to that there will also be 50 pounds
pressure on each square inch of the head, as well as on the sides of the
cylinder.

Fig. 131 shows a cylinder (A), a piston (B) and a steam inlet port (C),
in which is indicated how the steam pressure acts equally in all
directions. As, however, the piston is the only movable part, the force
of the steam is directed to that part, and the motion is then
transmitted to the crank, and to the shaft of the engine.

[Illustration: _Fig. 131. Steam Pressure_]

[Illustration: _Fig. 132. Water Pressure_]

This same thing applies to water which, as stated, is dependent on its
head. Fig. 132 represents a cylinder (D) with a vertically movable
piston (E) and a standpipe (F). Assuming that the pipe (F) is of
sufficient height to give a pressure of 50 pounds to the square inch,
then the piston (E) and the sides and head of the cylinder (D) would
have 50 pounds pressure on every square inch of surface.

FUELS.--In the use of fuels, such as the volatile hydrocarbons, the
direct expansive power of the fuel gases developed, is used to move the
piston back and forth. Engines so driven are called _Internal Combustion
Motors_.

POWER FROM WINDS.--Another source of power is from the wind acting
against wheels which have blades or vanes disposed at such angles that
there is a direct conversion of a rectilinear force into circular
motion.

In this case power is derived from the force of the moving air and the
calculation of energy developed is made by considering the pressure on
each square foot of surface. The following table shows the force exerted
at different speeds against a flat surface one foot square, held so that
the wind strikes it squarely:

--------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------+--------------++-------------------+--------------
SPEED OF WIND    |   PRESSURE   || SPEED OF WIND     |   PRESSURE
-----------------+--------------++-------------------+--------------
5 Miles per hour |        2 oz. || 35 miles per hour |  6 lb. 2 oz.
10 "        "    |        8  "  || 40   "       "    |  8  "
15 "        "    |  1 lb. 2  "  || 45   "       "    | 10  "  2  "
20 "        "    |  2  "        || 50   "       "    | 12  "  2  "
25 "        "    |  3  "  2  "  || 55   "       "    | 15  "  2  "
30 "        "    |  4  "  8  "  || 60   "       "    | 18  "
-----------------+--------------++-------------------+--------------

VARYING DEGREES OF PRESSURE.--It is curious to notice how the increase
in speed changes the pressure against the blade. Thus, a wind blowing 20
miles an hour shows 2 pounds pressure; whereas a wind twice that
velocity, or 40 miles an hour, shows a pressure of 8 pounds, which is
four times greater than at 20 miles.

It differs, therefore, from the law with respect to water pressure,
which is constant in relation to the height or the head--that is, for
every 28 inches height of water a pound pressure is added.

POWER FROM WAVES AND TIDES.--Many attempts have been made to harness the
waves and the tide and some of them have been successful. This effort
has been directed to the work of converting the oscillations of the
waves into a rotary motion, and also to take advantage of the to-and-fro
movement of the tidal flow. There is a great field in this direction for
the ingenious boy.

A PROFITABLE FIELD.--In no direction of human enterprise is there such
a wide and profitable field for work, as in the generation of power. It
is constantly growing in prominence, and calls for the exercise of the
skill of the engineer and the ingenuity of the mechanic. Efficiency and
economy are the two great watchwords, and this is what the world is
striving for. Success will come to him who can contribute to it in the
smallest degree.

Capital is not looking for men who can cheapen the production of an
article 50 per cent., but 1 per cent. The commercial world does not
expect an article to be 100 per cent, better. Five per cent. would be an
inducement for business.




CHAPTER XII

ON MEASURES


HORSE-POWER.--When work is performed it is designated as horse-power,
usually indicated by the letters H. P.; but the unit of work is called a
_foot pound_.

If one pound should be lifted 550 feet in one second, or 550 pounds one
foot in the same time, it would be designated as one horse-power. For
that reason it is called a foot pound. Instead of using the figure to
indicate the power exerted during one minute of time, the time is taken
for a minute, in all calculations, so that 550 multiplied by the number
of seconds, 60, in a minute, equals 33,000 foot pounds.

FOOT POUNDS.--The calculation of horse-power is in a large measure
arbitrary. It was determined in this way: Experiments show that the heat
expended in vaporizing 34 pounds of water per hour, develops a force
equal to 33,000 foot pounds; and since it takes about 4 pounds of coal
per hour to vaporize that amount of water, the heat developed by that
quantity of coal develops the same force as that exercised by an average
horse exerting his strength at ordinary work.

All power is expressed in foot pounds. Suppose a cannon ball of
sufficient weight and speed strikes an object. If the impact should
indicate 33,000 pounds it would not mean that the force employed was one
horse-power, but that many foot pounds.

If there should be 60 impacts of 550 pounds each within a minute, it
might be said that it would be equal to 1 horse-power, but the correct
way to express it would be foot pounds.

So in every calculation, where power is to be calculated, first find out
how many foot pounds are developed, and then use the unit of measure,
33,000, as the divisor to get the horse-power, if you wish to express it
in that way.

It must be understood, therefore, that horse-power is a simple unit of
work, whereas a foot pound is a compound unit formed of a foot paired
with the weight of a pound.

ENERGY.--Now _work_ and _energy_ are two different things. Work is the
overcoming of resistance of any kind, either by causing or changing
motion, or maintaining it against the action of some other force.

Energy, on the other hand, is the power of doing work. Falling water
possesses energy; so does a stone poised on the edge of a cliff. In the
case of water, it is called _kinetic_ energy; in the stone _potential_
energy. A pound of pressure against the stone will cause the latter, in
falling, to develop an enormous energy; so it will be seen that this
property resides, or is within the thing itself. It will be well to
remember these definitions.

HOW TO FIND OUT THE POWER DEVELOPED.--The measure of power produced by
an engine, or other source, is so interesting to boys that a sketch is
given of a Prony Brake, which is the simplest form of the Dynamometer,
as these measuring machines are called.

[Illustration: _Fig. 133. Prony Brake_]

In the drawing (A) is the shaft, with a pulley (A), which turns in the
direction of the arrow (B). C is a lever which may be of any length.
This has a block (C), which fits on the pulley, and below the shaft,
and surrounding it, are blocks (D) held against the pulley by a chain
(E), the ends of the chain being attached to bolts (F) which pass
through the block (C) and lever (C).

Nuts (G) serve to draw the bolts upwardly and thus tighten the blocks
against the shaft. The free end of the lever has stops (H) above and
below, so as to limit its movement. Weights (I) are suspended from the
end of the lever.

[Illustration: _Fig. 134. Speed Indicator_]

THE TEST.--The test is made as follows: The shaft is set in motion, and
the nuts are tightened until its full power at the required speed is
balanced by the weight put on the platform.

The following calculation can then be made:

For our present purpose we shall assume that the diameter of the pulley
(A) is 4 inches; the length of the lever (C), 3 feet; the speed of the
shaft (A) and the pulley, 210 revolutions per minute; and the weight 600
pounds.

Now proceed as follows:

(1) Multiply the diameter of the pulley (A) (4 inches) by 3.1416, and
this will give the circumference 12.5664 inches; or, 1.0472 feet.

(2) Multiply this product (1.0472) by the revolutions per minute. 1.0472
 210 = 219.912. This equals the _speed_ of the periphery of the pulley.

(3) The next step is to get the length of the lever (C) from the center
of the shaft (A) to the point from which the weights are suspended, and
divide this by one-half of the diameter of the pulley (A). 36"  2" =
18", or 1-1/2 feet. This is the _leverage_.

(4) Then multiply the _weight_ in pounds by the _leverage_. 600  1-1/2
= 900.

(5) Next multiply this product (900) by the _speed_, 900  219.912 =
197,920.8, which means _foot pounds_.

(6) As each horse-power has 33,000 foot pounds, the last product should
be divided by this figure, and we have 197,920.8  33,000 = 5.99 H. P.

THE FOOT MEASURE.--How long is a foot, and what is it determined by? It
is an arbitrary measure. The human foot is the basis of the measurement.
But what is the length of a man's foot? It varied in different countries
from 9 to 21 inches.

In England, in early days, it was defined as a measure of length
consisting of 12 inches, or 36 barleycorns laid end to end. But
barleycorns differ in length as well as the human foot, so the standard
adopted is without any real foundation or reason.

WEIGHT.--To determine weight, however, a scientific standard was
adopted. A gallon contains 8.33 pounds avoirdupois weight of distilled
water. This gallon is divided up in two ways; one by weight, and the
other by measurement.

Each gallon contains 231 cubic inches of distilled water. As it has four
quarts, each quart has 57-3/4 cubic inches, and as each quart is
comprised of two pints, each pint has nearly 29 cubic inches.

THE GALLON.--The legal gallon in the United States is equal to a
cylindrical measure 7 inches in diameter and 6 inches deep.

Notwithstanding the weights and dimensions of solids and liquids are
thus fixed by following a scientific standard, the divisions into
scruples, grains, pennyweights and tons, as well as cutting them up into
pints, quarts and other units, is done without any system, and for this
reason the need of a uniform method has been long considered by every
country.

THE METRIC SYSTEM.--As early as 1528, Fernal, a French physician,
suggested the metric system. Our own government recognized the value of
this plan when it established the system of coinage.

The principle lies in fixing a unit, such as a dollar, or a pound, or a
foot, and then making all divisions, or addition, in multiples of ten.
Thus, we have one mill; ten mills to make a dime; ten dimes to make a
dollar, and so on.

BASIS OF MEASUREMENT.--The question arose, what to use as the basis of
measurement, and it was proposed to use the earth itself, as the
measure. For this purpose the meridian line running around the earth at
the latitude of Paris was selected.

One-quarter of this measurement around the globe was found to be
393,707,900 inches, and this was divided into 10,000,000 parts. Each
part, therefore, was a little over 39.37 inches in length, and this was
called a meter, which means _measure_.

A decimeter is one-tenth of that, namely, 3.937 inches; and a decameter
39.37, or ten times the meter, and so on.

For convenience the metrical table is given, showing lengths in feet and
inches, in which only three decimal points are used.

Metrical Table, showing measurements in feet and inches:

METRICAL TABLE, SHOWING MEASUREMENTS IN FEET
AND INCHES

------------------------------------------
------------+--------------+--------------
   Length   |    Inches    |    Feet
------------+--------------+--------------
Millimeter  |       0.039  |      0.003
Centimeter  |       0.393  |      0.032
Decimeter   |       3.937  |      0.328
Meter       |      39.370  |      3.280
Decameter   |     393.707  |     32.808
Hectometer  |    3937.079  |    328.089
Kilometer   |   39370.790  |   3280.899
Myriameter  |  393707.900  |  32808.992
------------+--------------+--------------

METRIC SYSTEM, SHOWING THE EQUIVALENTS
IN OUR MEASURES

1 Myriameter            = 5.4 nautical miles, or 6.21 statute
                            miles.

1 Kilometer             = 0.621 statute mile, or nearly 5/8
                            mile.

1 Hectometer            = 109.4 yards.

1 Decameter             = 0.497 chain, 1.988 rods.

1 Meter                 = 39.37 inches, or nearly 3 ft. 3-3/8
                            inches.

1 Decimeter             = 3.937 inches.

1 Centimeter            = 0.3937 inch.

1 Millimeter            = 0.03937 inch.

1 Micron                = 1/25400 inch.

1 Hectare               = 2.471 acres.

1 Arc                   = 119.6 square yards.

1 Centaire, or square
meter                   = 10.764 square feet.

1 Decastere             = 13 cubic yards, or about 2-3/4
                            cords.

1 Stere, or cubic meter = 1.308 cubic yards, or 35.3 cubic
                            feet.

1 Decistere             = 3-1/2 cubic feet.

1 Kiloliter             = 1 ton, 12 gal., 2 pints, 2 gills
                            old wine measure.

1 Hectoliter            = 22.01 Imperial gals., or 26.4
                            U. S. gals.

1 Decaliter             = 2 gallons, 1 pint, 2-2/5 gills, imperial
                            measure, or 2 gals., 2
                            qts., 1 pt., 1/2 gill, U. S.

1 Liter                 = 1 pint, 3 gills, imperial, or 1 qt.,
                            1/2 gill U. S. measure.

1 Decileter             = 0.704 gill, imperial, or 0.845 gill
                            U. S. measure.

1 Millier               = 2,204.6 pounds avoirdupois.

1 Metric quintal        = 2  hundredweight, less 3-1/2
                            pounds, or 220 pounds, 7
                            ounces.

1 Kilogram              = 2  pounds, 3 ounces, 4-3/8
                            drams avoirdupois.

1 Hectogram             = 3 ounces, 8-3/8 drams avoirdupois.

1 Decagram              = 154.32 grains Troy.

1 Gram                  = 15.432 grains.

1 Decigram              = 1.542 grain.

1 Centigram             = 0.154 grain.

1 Milligram             = 0.015 grain.




CHAPTER XIII

USEFUL INFORMATION FOR THE WORKSHOP


To find the circumference of a circle: Multiply the diameter by 3.1416.

To find the diameter of a circle: Multiply the circle by .31831.

To find the area of a circle: Multiply the square of the diameter by
.7854.

To find the area of a triangle: Multiply the base by one-half the
perpendicular height.

To find the surface of a ball: Multiply the square of the diameter by
3.1416.

To find the solidity of a sphere: Multiply the cube of the diameter by
.5236.

To find the cubic contents of a cone: Multiply the area of the base by
one-third the altitude.

Doubling the diameter of a pipe increases its capacity four times.

To find the pressure in pounds per square inch of a column of water:
Multiply the height of the column in feet by .434.

Standard Horse-power: The evaporation of 30 pounds of water per hour
from a feed water temperature of 1,000 degrees Fahrenheit into steam at
70 pounds gauge pressure.

To find the capacity of any tank in gallons: Square the diameter in
inches, multiply by the length, and then by .0034.

In making patterns for aluminum castings provision must be made for
shrinkage to a greater extent than with any other metal or alloy.

The toughness of aluminum can be increased by adding a small per cent.
of phosphorus.

All alloys of metals having mercury are called _amalgams_.

A sheet of zinc suspended in the water of a boiler will produce an
electrolytic action and prevent scaling to a considerable extent.

Hydrofluoric acid will not affect a pure diamond, but will dissolve all
imitations.

A strong solution of alum put into glue will make it insoluble in water.

A grindstone with one side harder than the other can have its flinty
side softened by immersing that part in boiled linseed oil.

One barrel contains 3-3/4 cubic feet.

One cubic yard contains 7-1/4 barrels.

To find the speed of a driven pulley of a given diameter: Multiply the
diameter of the driving pulley by its speed or number of revolutions.
Divide this by the diameter of the driven pulley. The result will be the
number of revolutions of the driven pulley.

To find the diameter of a driven pulley that shall make any given number
of revolutions in the same time: Multiply the diameter of the driving
pulley by its number of revolutions, and divide the product by the
number of revolutions of the driven pulley.

A piece of the well-known tar soap held against the inside of a belt
while running will prevent it from slipping, and will not injure the
belt.

Boiler scale is composed of the carbonate or the sulphate of lime. To
prevent the formation it is necessary to use some substance which will
precipitate these elements in the water. The cheapest and most
universally used for this purpose are soda ash and caustic soda.

Gold bronze is merely a mixture of equal parts of oxide of tin and
sulphur. To unite them they are heated for some time in an earthen
retort.

Rusted utensils may be cleaned of rust by applying either turpentine or
kerosene oil, and allowing them to stand over night, when the excess may
be wiped off. Clean afterwards with fine emery cloth.

Plaster of paris is valuable for many purposes in a machine shop, but
the disadvantage in handling it is, that it sets so quickly, and its use
is, therefore, very much limited. To prevent quick setting mix a small
amount of arrow root powder with the plaster before it is mixed, and
this will keep it soft for some time, and also increase its hardness
when it sets.

For measuring purposes a tablespoon holds 1/2 ounce; a dessertspoon 1/4
ounce; a teaspoon 1/8 ounce; a teacupful of sugar weighs 1/2 pound; two
teacupsful of butter weigh 1 pound; 1-1/3 pints of powdered sugar weigh
1 pound; one pint of distilled water weighs 1 pound.

Ordinarily, 450 drops of liquid are equal to 1 ounce; this varies with
different liquids, some being thicker in consistency than others, but
for those of the consistency of water the measure given is fairly
accurate.




CHAPTER XIV

THE SIMPLICITY OF GREAT INVENTIONS, AND OF NATURE'S MANIFESTATIONS


If there is anything in the realm of mechanics which excites the wonder
and admiration of man, it is the knowledge that the greatest inventions
are the simplest, and that the inventor must take advantage of one law
in nature which is universal in its application, and that is vibration.

There is a key to every secret in nature's great storehouse. It is not a
complicated one, containing a multiplicity of wards and peculiar angles
and recesses. It is the very simplicity in most of the problems which
long served as a bar to discovery in many of the arts. So extremely
simple have been some of the keys that many inventions resulted from
accidents.

INVENTION PRECEDES SCIENCE.--Occasionally inventions were brought about
by persistency and energy, and ofttimes by theorizing; but science
rarely ever aids invention. The latter usually precedes science. Thus,
reasoning could not show how it might be possible for steam to force
water into a boiler against its own pressure. But the injector does
this.

If, prior to 1876, it had been suggested that a sonorous vibration could
be converted into an electrical pulsation, and transformed back again to
a sonorous vibration, science would have proclaimed it impossible; but
the telephone does it. Invention shows how things are done, and science
afterwards explains the phenomena and formulates theories and laws which
become serviceable to others in the arts.

SIMPLICITY IN INVENTIONS.--But let us see how exceedingly simple are
some of the great discoveries of man.

THE TELEGRAPH.--The telegraph is nothing but a magnet at each end of a
wire, with a lever for an armature, which opens and closes the circuit
that passes through the magnets and armature, so that an impulse on the
lever, or armature, at one end, by making and breaking the circuit, also
makes and breaks the circuit at the other end.

TELEPHONE.--The telephone has merely a disk close to but not touching
the end of a magnet. The sonorous vibration of the voice oscillates the
diaphragm, and as the diaphragm is in the magnetic field of the magnet,
it varies the pressure, so called, causing the diaphragm at the other
end of the wire to vibrate in unison and give out the same sound
originally imparted to the other diaphragm.

TRANSMITTER.--The transmitter is merely a sensitized instrument. It
depends solely on the principle of light contact points in an electric
circuit, whereby the vibrations of the voice are augmented.

PHONOGRAPH.--The phonograph is not an electrical instrument. It has a
diaphragm provided centrally with a blunt pin, or stylus. To make the
record, some soft or plastic material, like wax, or tinfoil, is caused
to move along so that the point of the stylus makes impressions in it,
and the vibrations of the diaphragm cause the point to traverse a groove
of greater or smaller indentations. When this groove is again presented
to the stylus the diaphragm is vibrated and gives forth the sounds
originally imparted to it when the indentations were made.

WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY.--Wireless telegraphy depends for its action on what
is called induction. Through this property a current is made of a high
electro-motive force, which means of a high voltage, and this disturbs
the ether with such intensity that the waves are sent out in all
directions to immense distances.

The great discovery has been to find a mechanism sensitive enough to
detect the induction waves. The instrument for this purpose is called a
coherer, in which small particles cohere through the action of the
electric waves, and are caused to fall apart mechanically, during the
electrical impulses.

PRINTING TELEGRAPH.--The printing telegraph requires the synchronous
turning of two wheels. This means that two wheels at opposite ends of a
wire must be made to turn at exactly the same rate of speed. Originally,
this was tried by clock work, but without success commercially, for the
reason that a pendulum does not beat with the same speed at the equator,
as at different latitudes, nor at altitudes; and temperature also
affects the rate. The solution was found by making the two wheels move
by means of a timing fork, which vibrates with the same speed
everywhere, and under all conditions.

ELECTRIC MOTOR.--The direct current electric motor depends for its
action on the principle that likes repel, and unlikes attract. The
commutator so arranges the poles that at the proper points, in the
revolution of the armature, the poles are always presented to each other
in such a way that as they approach each other, they are opposites, and
thus attract, and as they recede from each other they repel. A dynamo is
exactly the same, except that the commutator reverses the operation and
makes the poles alike as they approach each other, and unlike as they
recede.

Steel is simply iron, to which has been added a small per cent of
carbon.

Quinine is efficient in its natural state, but it has been made
infinitely more effectual by the breaking up or changing of the
molecules with acids. Sulphate of quinine is made by the use of
sulphuric acid as a solvent.

EXPLOSIONS.--Explosions depend on oxygen. While this element does not
burn, a certain amount of it must be present to support combustion.
Thus, the most inflammable gas or liquid will not burn or explode unless
oxygenized. Explosives are made by using a sufficient amount, in a
concentrated form, which is added to the fuel, so that when it is
ignited there is a sufficient amount of oxygen present to support
combustion, hence the rapid explosion which follows.

VIBRATION IN NATURE.--The physical meaning of vibration is best
illustrated by the movement of a pendulum. All agitation is vibration.
All force manifests itself in this way.

The painful brilliancy of the sun is produced by the rapid vibrations of
the rays; the twinkle of the distant star, the waves of the ocean when
ruffled by the winds; the shimmer of the moon on its crested surface;
the brain in thinking; the mouth in talking; the beating of the heart;
all, alike, obey the one grand and universal law of vibratory motion.

QUALITIES OF SOUND.--Sound is nothing but a succession of vibrations of
greater or less magnitude. Pitch is produced by the number of
vibrations; intensity by their force; and quality by the character of
the article vibrated.

Since the great telephone controversy which took place some years ago
there has been a wonderful development in the knowledge of acoustics, or
sounds. It was shown that the slightest sound would immediately set into
vibration every article of furniture in a room, and very sensitive
instruments have been devised to register the force and quality.

THE PHOTOGRAPHER'S PLATE.--It is known that the chemical action of an
object on a photographer's plate is due to vibration; each represents a
force of different intensity, hence the varying shades produced. Owing
to the different rates of vibrations caused by the different colors, the
difficulty has been to photograph them, but this has now been
accomplished. Harmony, or "being in tune," as is the common expression,
is as necessary in light, as in music.

Some chemicals will bring out or "develop," the pictures; others will
not. Colors are now photographed because invention and science have
found the harmonizing chemicals.

QUADRUPLEX TELEGRAPHY.--One of the most remarkable of all the wonders of
our age is what is known as duplex and quadruplex telegraphy. Every atom
and impulse in electricity is oscillation. The current which transmits
a telegram is designated in the science as "vibratory."

But how is it possible to transmit two or more messages over one wire at
the same time? It is by bringing into play the harmony of sounds. One
message is sent in one direction in the key of A; another message in the
other direction in B; and so any number may be sent, because the
electrical vibrations may be tuned, just like the strings of a violin.

ELECTRIC HARMONY.--Every sound produces a corresponding vibration in
surrounding objects. While each vibrates, or is capable of transmitting
a sound given to it by its vibratory powers, it may not vibrate in
harmony.

When a certain key of a piano is struck every key has a certain
vibration, and if we could separate it from the other sounds, it would
reflect the same sound as the string struck, just the same as the walls
of a room or the air itself would convey that sound.

But as no two strings in the instrument vibrate the same number of times
each second, the rapid movement of successive sounds of the keys do not
interfere with each other. If, however, there are several pianos in a
room, and all are tuned the same pitch, the striking of a key on one
instrument will instantly set in vibration the corresponding strings in
all the other instruments.

This is one reason why a piano tested in a music wareroom has always a
more beautiful and richer sound than when in a drawing-room or hall,
since each string is vibrated by the other instrument.

If a small piece of paper is balanced upon the strings of a violin,
every key of the piano may be struck, except the one in tune, without
affecting the paper; but the moment the same key is struck the vibration
of the harmonizing pitch will unbalance the paper.

The musical sound of C produces 528 vibrations per second; D 616, and so
on. The octave above has double the number of vibrations of the lower
note. It will thus be understood why discord in music is not pleasant to
the ear, as the vibrations are not in the proper multiples.

ODORS.--So with odors. The sense of smell is merely the force set in
motion by the vibration of the elements. An instrument called the
_odophone_ demonstrates that a scale or gamut exists in flowers; that
sharp smells indicate high tones and heavy smells low tones. Over fifty
odors have thus been analyzed.

The treble clef, note E, 4th space, is orange; note D, 1st space below,
violet; note F, 4th space above clef, ambergris. To make a proper
bouquet, therefore the different odors must be harmonized, just the
same as the notes of a musical chord are selected.

A BOUQUET OF VIBRATIONS.--The odophone shows that santal, geranium,
orange flower and camphor, make a bouquet in the key of C. It is easy to
conceive that a beautiful bouquet means nothing more than an agreeable
vibratory sensation of the olfactory nerves.

TASTE.--So with the sense of taste. The tongue is covered with minute
cells surrounded by nervous filaments which are set in motion whenever
any substance is brought into contact with the surface. Tasting is
merely the movement of these filaments, of greater or less rapidity.

If an article is tasteless, it means that these filaments do not
vibrate. These vibrations are of two kinds. They may move faster or
slower, or they may move in a peculiar way. A sharp acute taste means
that the vibrations are very rapid; a mild taste, slow vibrations.

When a pleasant taste is detected, it is only because the filaments are
set into an agreeable motion. The vibrations in the tongue may become so
rapid that it will be painful, just as a shriek becomes piercing to the
ear, or an intense light dazzling to the eye; all proceed from the same
physical force acting on the brain.

COLOR.--Color, that seemingly unexplainable force, becomes a simple
thing when the principles of vibration are applied, and this has been
fully explained by the spectroscope and its operation.

When the boy once appreciates that this force, or this motion in nature
is just as simple as the great inventions which have grown out of this
manifestation, he will understand that a knowledge of these things will
enable him to utilize the energy in a proper way.




CHAPTER XV

WORKSHOP RECIPES AND FORMULAS


In a work of this kind, dealing with the various elements, the boy
should have at hand recipes or formulas for everything which comes
within the province of his experiments. The following are most carefully
selected, the objects being to present those which are the more easily
compounded.

ADHESIVES FOR VARIOUS USES.--Waterproof glue. Use a good quality of
glue, and dissolve it in warm water, then add one pound of linseed oil
to eight pounds of the glue. Add three ounces of nitric acid.

Leather or Card-board Glue. After dissolving good glue in water, to
which a little turpentine has been added, mix it with a thick paste of
starch, the proportion of starch to glue being about two to every part
of glue used. The mixture is used cold.

A fine Belt Glue. Dissolve 50 ounces of gelatine in water, and heat
after pouring off the excess water. Then stir in five ounces of
glycerine, ten ounces of turpentine, and five ounces of linseed oil
varnish. If too thick add water to suit.

For cementing Iron to Marble. Use 30 parts of Plaster of Paris, 10 parts
of iron filings, and one half part of sal ammoniac. These are mixed up
with vinegar to make a fluid paste.

To cement Glass to Iron. Use 3 ounces of boiled linseed oil and 1 part
of copal varnish, and into this put 2 ounces of litharge and 1 ounce of
white lead and thoroughly mingle so as to make a smooth paste.

Water-proof Cement. Boiled linseed oil, 6 ounces; copal, 6 ounces;
litharge, 2 ounces; and white lead, 16 ounces. To be thoroughly
incorporated.

To unite rubber or leather to hard substances. One ounce of pulverized
gum shellac dissolved in 9-1/2 ounces of strong ammonia, will make an
elastic cement. Must be kept tightly corked.

For uniting iron to iron. Use equal parts of boiled oil, white lead,
pipe clay and black oxide of manganese, and form it into a paste.

Transparent Cement. Unite 1 ounce of india rubber, 67 ounces of
chloroform, and 40 ounces of mastic. This is to be kept together for a
week, and stirred at times, when it will be ready for use.

To Attach Cloth to Metal. Water 100 parts, sugar 10 parts, starch 20
parts, and zinc chloride 1 part. This must be first stirred and made
free of lumps, and then heated until it thickens.

United States Government Gum. Dissolve 1 part of gum arabic in water and
add 4 parts of sugar and 1 part of starch. This is then boiled for a
few minutes, and thinned down as required.

TO MAKE DIFFERENT ALLOYS.--Silver-aluminum. Silver one-fourth part, and
aluminum three-fourth parts.

Bell-metal. Copper, 80 parts; tin, 20 parts. Or, copper, 72 parts; tin,
26 parts; zinc, 2 parts. Or, copper 2; 1 of tin.

Brass. Copper, 66 parts; zinc, 32 parts; tin, 1 part; lead, 1 part.

Bronzes. Copper, 65 parts; zinc, 30 parts; tin, 5 parts. Or, copper, 85
parts; zinc, 10 parts; tin, 3 parts; lead, 2 parts.

German Silver. 52 parts of copper; 26 parts zinc; 22 parts nickel.

For Coating Mirrors. Tin, 70 parts; mercury, 30 parts.

BOILER COMPOUNDS.--To prevent scaling. Use common washing soda, or
Glauber salts.

TO DISSOLVE CELLULOID.--Use 50 parts of alcohol and 5 parts of camphor
for every 5 parts of celluloid. When the celluloid is put into the
solution it will dissolve it.

To Soften Celluloid. This may be done by simply heating, so it will
bend, and by putting it in steam, it can be worked like dough.

CLAY MIXTURE FOR FORGES.--Mix dry 20 parts of fire clay, 20 parts
cast-iron turnings, one part of common salt, and 1/2 part sal ammoniac,
and then add water while stirring, so as to form a mortar of the proper
consistency. The mixture will become very hard when heat is applied.

A Modeling Clay. This is made by mixing the clay with glycerine and
afterwards adding vaseline. If too much vaseline is added it becomes too
soft.

FLUIDS FOR CLEANING CLOTHES, FURNITURE, ETC.--For Delicate Fabrics. Make
strong decoction of soap bark, and put into alcohol.

Non-inflammable Cleaner. Equal parts of acetone, ammonia and diluted
alcohol.

Taking dried paint from clothing. Shake up 2 parts of ammonia water with
1 part of spirits of turpentine.

Cleaning Furniture, etc. Unite 2.4 parts of wax; 9.4 parts of oil of
turpentine; 42 parts acetic acid; 42 parts citric acid; 42 parts white
soap. This must be well mingled before using.

Removing Rust from Iron or Steel. Rub the surface with oil of tartar.
Or, apply turpentine or kerosene, and after allowing to stand over
night, clean with emery cloth.

For Removing Ink Stains from Silver. Use a paste made of chloride of
lime and water.

To clean Silver-Plated Ware. Make a mixture of cream of tartar, 2 parts;
levigated chalk, 2 parts; and alum, 1 part. Grind up the alum and mix
thoroughly.

Cleaning a Gas Stove. Make a solution of 9 parts of caustic soda and 150
parts of water, and put the separate parts of the stove in the solution
for an hour or two. The parts will come out looking like new.

Cleaning Aluminum. A few drops of sulphuric acid in water will restore
the luster to aluminum ware.

Oil Eradicator. Soap spirits, 100 parts; ammonia solution, 25; acetic
ether, 15 parts.

DISINFECTANTS.--Camphor, 1 ounce; carbolic acid (75 per cent.), 12
ounces; aqua ammonia, 10 drachms; soft salt water, 8 drachms.

Water-Closet Deodorant. Ferric chloride, 4 parts; zinc chloride, 5
parts; aluminum chloride, 4 parts; calcium chloride, 5 parts; magnesium
chloride, 3 parts; and water sufficient to make 90 parts. When all is
dissolved add to each gallon 10 grains of thymol and a quarter-ounce of
rosemary that had been previously dissolved in six quarts of alcohol.

Odorless Disinfectants. Mercuric chloride, 1 part; cupric sulphate, 10
parts; zinc sulphate, 50 parts; sodium chloride, 65 parts; water to make
1,000 parts.

Emery for Lapping Purposes. Fill a pint bottle with machine oil and
emery flour, in the proportion of 7 parts oil and 1 part emery. Allow it
to stand for twenty minutes, after shaking up well, then pour off half
the contents, without disturbing the settlings, and the part so poured
off contains only the finest of the emery particles, and is the only
part which should be used on the lapping roller.

EXPLOSIVES.--Common Gunpowder. Potassium nitrate, 75 parts; charcoal, 15
parts; sulphur, 10 parts.

Dynamite. 75 per cent. nitro-glycerine; 25 per cent. infusorial earth.

Giant Powder. 36 per cent. nitro-glycerine; 48 per cent. nitrate of
potash; 8 per cent. of sulphur; 8 per cent. charcoal.

Fulminate. Chlorate of potassia, 6 parts; pure lampblack, 4 parts;
sulphur, 1 part. A blow will cause it to explode.

FILES.--How to Keep Clean. Olive oil is the proper substance to rub over
files, as this will prevent the creases from filling up while in use,
and preserve the file for a longer time, and also enable it to do better
cutting.

To Renew Old Files. Use a potash bath for boiling them in, and
afterwards brush them well so as to get the creases clean. Then stretch
a cotton cloth between two supports, and after plunging the file into
nitric acid, use the stretched cloth to wipe off the acid. The object is
to remove the acid from the ridges of the file, so the acid will only
eat out or etch the deep portions between the ridges, and not affect the
edges or teeth.

FIRE PROOF MATERIALS OR SUBSTANCES.--For Wood. For the kind where it is
desired to apply with a brush, use 100 parts sodium silicate; 50 parts
of Spanish white, and 100 parts of glue. It must be applied hot.

Another good preparation is made as follows: Sodium silicate, 350 parts;
asbestos, powdered, 350 parts; and boiling water 1,000 parts.

For Coating Steel, etc. Silica, 50 parts; plastic fire clay, 10 parts;
ball clay, 3 parts. To be thoroughly mixed.

For Paper. Ammonium sulphate, 8 parts; boracic acid, 3 parts; borax, 2
parts; water, 100 parts. This is applied in a liquid state to the paper
surface.

FLOOR DRESSINGS.--Oil Stain. Neats' foot oil, 1 part; cottonseed oil, 1
part; petroleum oil, 1 part. This may be colored with anything desired,
like burnt sienna, annatto, or other coloring material.

Ballroom Powder. Hard paraffine, 1 pound; powdered boric acid, 7 pounds;
oil of lavender, 1 drachm; oil of neroli, 20 minims.

FOOT POWDERS.--For Perspiring Feet. Balsam Peru, 15 minims; formic
acid, 1 drachm; chloral hydrate, 1 drachm; alcohol to make 3 ounces.

For Easing Feet. Tannaform, 1 drachm; talcum, 2 drachms; lycopodium, 30
grains.

Frost Bites. Carbolized water, 4 drachms; nitric acid, 1 drop; oil of
geranium, 1 drop.

GLASS.--To cut glass, hold it under water, and use a pair of shears.

To make a hole through glass, place a circle of moist earth on the
glass, and form a hole in this the diameter wanted for the hole, and in
this hole pour molten lead, and the part touched by the lead will fall
out.

To Frost Glass. Cover it with a mixture of 6 ounces of magnesium
sulphate, 2 ounces of dextrine, and 20 ounces of water. This produces a
fine effect.

To imitate ground glass, use a composition of sandarac, 2-1/2 ounces;
mastic, 1/2 ounce; ether, 24 ounces; and benzine, 16 ounces.

IRON AND STEEL.--How to distinguish them. Wash the metal and put it into
a solution of bichromate of potash to which has been added a small
amount of sulphuric acid. In a minute or so take out the metal, wash and
wipe it. Soft steel and cast iron will have the appearance of an
ash-gray tint; tempered steels will be black; and puddled or refined
irons will be nearly white and have a metallic reflection.

To Harden Iron or Steel. If wrought iron, put in the charge 20 parts, by
weight, of common salt, 2 parts of potassium cyanide, .3 part of
potassium bichromate, .15 part of broken glass.

To harden cast iron, there should be added to the charge the following:
To 60 parts of water, add 2-1/2 parts of vinegar, 3 parts of common
salt, and .25 part of hydrochloric acid.

To soften castings: Heat them to a high temperature and cover them with
fine coal dust and allow to cool gradually.

LACQUERS.--For Aluminum. Dissolve 100 parts of gum lac in 300 parts of
ammonia and heat for an hour moderately in a water bath. The aluminum
must be well cleaned before applying. Heat the aluminum plate
afterwards.

For Brass. Make a compound as follows; Annatto, 1/4 ounce; saffro, 1/4
ounce; turmeric, 1 ounce; seed lac, 3 ounces; and alcohol, 1 pint. Allow
the mixture to stand for three days, then strain in the vessel which
contains the seed lac, and allow to stand until all is dissolved.

For Copper. Heat fine, thickly liquid amber varnish so it can be readily
applied to the copper, and this is allowed to dry. Then heat the coated
object until it commences to smoke and turn brown.

LUBRICANTS.--Heavy machinery oils. Use paraffine, 8 pounds; palm oil, 20
pounds; and oleonaptha, 12 pounds. Dissolve the paraffine in the
oleonaptha at a temperature of 160 degrees and then stir in the palm oil
a little at a time.

For Cutting Tools. Heat six gallons of water and put in three and a half
pounds of soft soap and a half gallon of clean refuse oil. It should be
well mixed.

For high-speed bearings. Use flaky graphite and kerosene oil. Apply this
as soon as there is any indication of heating in the bearings.

For lathe centers, one part of graphite and four parts of tallow
thoroughly mixed and applied will be very serviceable.

For Wooden Gears. Use tallow, 30 parts; palm oil; 20 parts; fish oil, 10
parts; and graphite, 20 parts.

PAPER.--FIRE PROOF PAPER.--Make the following solution: Ammonium
sulphate, 8 parts; boracic acid, 3 parts; water, 100 parts. Mix at a
temperature of 120 degrees. Paper coated with this will resist heat.

Filter Paper. Dip the paper into nitric acid of 1.433 specific gravity,
and subsequently wash and dry it. This makes a fine filtering body.

Carbon Paper. A variety of substances may be used, such as fine soot or
ivory black, ultramarine or Paris blue. Mix either with fine grain
soap, so it is of a uniform consistency and then apply to the paper with
a stiff brush, rubbing it in until it is evenly spread over the surface.

Tracing Paper. Take unsized paper and apply a coat of varnish made of
equal parts of Canada balsam and oil of turpentine. To increase the
transparency give another coat. The sheets must be well dried before
using.

PHOTOGRAPHY.--Developers.

1. Pure water, 30 ounces; sulphite soda, 5 ounces; carbonate soda, 2-1/2
ounces.

2. Pure water, 24 ounces; oxalic acid, 15 grains; pyrogallic acid, 1
ounce.

To develop use of solution 1, 1 ounce; solution 2, 1/2 ounce; and water,
3 ounces.

Stock solutions for developing: Make solution No. 1 as follows: water,
32 ounces; tolidol, I ounce; sodium sulphate, 1-1/2 ounces.

Solution No. 2: Water, 32 ounces; sodium sulphate.

Solution No. 3: Water, 32 ounces; sodium carbonate, from 4 to 6 ounces.

Fixing bath. Add two ounces of S. P. C. clarifier (acid bisulphate of
sodium) solution to one quart of hypo solution 1 in 5.

Clearing solution. Saturated solution of alum, 20 ounces; and
hydrochloric acid, 1 ounce. Varnish. Brush over the negative a solution
of equal parts of benzol and Japanese gold size.

PLASTERS.--Court Plaster. Use good quality silk, and on this spread a
solution of isinglass warmed. Dry and repeat several times, then apply
several coats of balsam of Peru. Or,

On muslin or silk properly stretched, apply a thin coating of smooth
strained flour paste, and when dry several coats of colorless gelatine
are added. The gelatine is applied warm, and cooled before the fabric is
taken off.

PLATING.--Bronze coating. For antiques, use vinegar, 1,000 parts; by
weight, powdered bloodstone, 125 parts; plumbago, 25 parts. Apply with
brush.

For brass where a copper surface is desired, make a rouge with a little
chloride of platinum and water, and apply with a brush.

For gas fixtures. Use a bronze paint and mix with it five times its
volume of spirit of turpentine, and to this mixture add dried slaked
lime, about 40 grains to the pint. Agitate well and decant the clear
liquid.

COLORING METALS.--Brilliant black for iron. Selenious acid, 6 parts;
cupric sulphate, 10 parts; water 1,000 parts; nitric acid, 5 parts.

Blue-black. Selenious acid, 10 parts; nitric acid, 5 parts; cupric
sulphate; water, 1,000 parts. The colors will be varied dependent on
the time the objects are immersed in the solution.

Brass may be colored brown by using an acid solution of nitrate of
silver and bismuth; or a light bronze by an acid solution of nitrate of
silver and copper; or black by a solution of nitrate of copper.

To copper plate aluminum, take 30 parts of sulphate of copper; 30 parts
of cream of tartar; 25 parts of soda; and 1,000 parts of water. The
article to be coated is merely dipped into the solution.

POLISHERS.--Floor Polish. Permanganate of potash in boiling water,
applied to the floor hot, will produce a stain, the color being
dependent on the number of coats. The floor may them be polished with
beeswax and turpentine.

For Furniture. Make a paste of equal parts of plaster of paris, whiting,
pumice stone and litharge, mixed with Japan dryer, boiled linseed oil
and turpentine. This may be colored to suit. This will fill the cracks
of the wood. Afterwards rub over the entire surface of the wood with a
mixture of 1 part Japan, 2 of linseed oil, and three parts of
turpentine, also colored, and after this has been allowed to slightly
harden, rub it off, and within a day or two it will have hardened
sufficiently so that the surface can be polished.

Stove Polish. Ceresine, 12 parts; Japan wax, 10 parts; turpentine oil,
100 parts; lampblack, 12 parts; graphite, 10 parts. Melt the ceresine
and wax together, and cool off partly, and then add and stir in the
graphite and lampblack which were previously mixed up with the
turpentine.

PUTTY.--Black Putty. Whiting and antimony sulphide, and soluble glass.
This can be polished finely after hardening.

Common Putty. Whiting and linseed oil mixed up to form a dough.

RUST PREVENTIVE.--For Machinery. Dissolve an ounce of camphor in one
pound of melted lard. Mix with this enough fine black lead to give it an
iron color. After it has been on for a day, rub off with a cloth.

For tools, yellow vaseline is the best substance.

For zinc, clean the plate by immersing in water that has a small amount
of sulphuric acid in it. Then wash clean and coat with asphalt varnish.

SOLDERS.--For aluminum. Use 5 parts of tin and 1 part of aluminum as the
alloy, and solder with the iron or a blow pipe.

Yellow hard solder. Brass, 3-1/2 parts; and zinc, 1 part.

For easily fusing, make an alloy of equal parts of brass and zinc.

For a white hard solder use brass, 12 parts; zinc, 1 part; and tin, 2
parts.

SOLDERING FLUXES.--For soft soldering, use a solution of chloride of
zinc and sal ammoniac. Powdered rosin is also used.

For hard soldering, borax is used most frequently.

A mixture of equal parts of cryolite and barium chloride is very good in
soldering bronze or aluminum alloys.

Other hard solders are alloyed as follows: brass, 4 parts; and zinc, 5
parts. Also brass, 7 parts; and zinc, 2 parts.

Steel Tempering-.-Heat the steel red hot and then plunge it into sealing
wax.

For tempering small steel springs, they may be plunged into a fish oil
which has a small amount of rosin and tallow.

VARNISHES.--Black Varnish. Shellac, 5 parts; borax, 2 parts; glycerine,
2 parts; aniline black, 6 parts; water, 45 parts. Dissolve the shellac
in hot water and add the other ingredients at a temperature of 200
degrees.

A good can varnish is made by dissolving 15 parts of shellac, and adding
thereto 2 parts of Venice turpentine, 8 parts of sandarac, and 75 parts
of spirits.

A varnish for tin and other small metal boxes is made of 75 parts
alcohol, which dissolves 15 parts of shellac, and 3 parts of turpentine.

SEALING WAX.--For modeling purposes. White wax, 20 parts; turpentine, 5
parts; sesame oil, 2 parts; vermilion, 2 parts.

Ordinary Sealing. 4 pounds of shellac, 1 pound Venice turpentine, add 3
pounds of vermilion. Unite by heat.




CHAPTER XVI

HANDY TABLES


TABLE OF WEIGHTS FOR ROUND AND SQUARE STEEL.

The Estimate is on the basis of Lineal Feet. 1 cu. ft. of Steel--490
lbs.

==========+===================+==========+===================
          |                   |          |
          | Weight in Pounds  |          | Weight in Pounds
 Sizes in |                   | Sizes in |
  Inches  +---------+---------+  Inches  +---------+---------
          |  Round  | Square  |          |  Round  | Square
----------+---------+---------+----------+---------+---------
   1/16   |   .110  |   .013  |  1-1/16  |  3.014  |  3.400
   1/8    |   .042  |   .053  |  1-1/8   |  3.379  |  3.838
   3/16   |   .094  |   .119  |  1-3/16  |  3.766  |  4.303
   1/4    |   .167  |   .212  |  1-1/4   |  4.173  |  4.795
   5/16   |   .261  |   .333  |  1-5/16  |  4.600  |  5.312
   3/8    |   .375  |   .478  |  1-3/8   |  5.049  |  5.857
   7/16   |   .511  |   .651  |  1-7/16  |  5.518  |  6.428
   1/2    |   .667  |   .850  |  1-1/2   |  6.008  |  7.650
   9/16   |   .845  |  1.026  |  1-9/16  |  6.520  |  7.650
   5/8    |  1.043  |  1.328  |  1-5/8   |  7.051  |  8.301
  11/16   |  1.262  |  1.608  |  1-11/16 |  7.604  |  8.978
   3/4    |  1.502  |  1.913  |  1-3/4   |  8.178  | 10.41
  13/16   |  1.773  |  2.245  |  1-13/16 |  8.773  | 11.17
   7/8    |  2.044  |  2.603  |  1-7/8   |  9.388  | 11.95
  15/16   |  2.347  |  2.989  |  1-15/16 | 10.02   | 12.76
    1     |  2.670  |  3.400  |  2       | 10.68   | 13.60
----------+---------+---------+----------+---------+---------

WEIGHT OF FLAT STEEL BARS.

=========+=============================================================
Thickness|
   in    |                             Width
 Inches  |
---------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-----+------+------
   1/16  |  .212|  .265|  .32 |  .372|  .425|  .477|  .53|  .588|  .63
   1/8   |  .425|  .53 |  .64 |  .745|  .85 |  .955| 1.06| 1.17 | 1.27
   3/16  |  .638|  .797|  .957| 1.11 | 1.28 | 1.44 | 1.59| 1.75 | 1.91
   1/4   |  .85 | 1.06 | 1.28 | 1.49 | 1.70 | 1.91 | 2.12| 2.34 | 2.55
   5/16  | 1.06 | 1.33 | 1.59 | 1.86 | 2.12 | 2.39 | 2.65| 2.92 | 3.19
   3/8   | 1.28 | 1.59 | 1.92 | 2.23 | 2.55 | 2.87 | 3.19| 3.51 | 3.83
   7/16  | 1.49 | 1.85 | 2.23 | 2.60 | 2.98 | 3.35 | 3.72| 4.09 | 4.46
   1/2   | 1.70 | 2.12 | 2.55 | 2.98 | 3.40 | 3.83 | 4.25| 4.67 | 5.10
   9/16  | 1.92 | 2.39 | 2.87 | 3.35 | 3.83 | 4.30 | 4.78| 5.26 | 5.74
   5/8   | 2.12 | 2.65 | 3.19 | 3.72 | 4.25 | 4.78 | 5.31| 5.84 | 6.38
  11/16  | 2.34 | 2.92 | 3.51 | 4.09 | 4.67 | 5.26 | 5.84| 6.43 | 7.02
   3/4   | 2.55 | 3.19 | 3.83 | 4.47 | 5.10 | 5.75 | 6.38| 7.02 | 7.65
  13/16  | 2.76 | 3.45 | 4.14 | 4.48 | 5.53 | 6.21 | 6.90| 7.60 | 8.29
   7/8   | 2.98 | 3.72 | 4.47 | 5.20 | 5.95 | 6.69 | 7.44| 8.18 | 8.93
  15/16  | 3.19 | 3.99 | 4.78 | 5.58 | 6.38 | 7.18 | 7.97| 8.77 | 9.57
    1    | 3.40 | 4.25 | 5.10 | 5.95 | 6.80 | 7.65 | 8.50| 9.35 |10.20
---------+------+------+------+------+------+------+-----+------+------

AVOIRDUPOIS WEIGHT.

For Merchandise of all kinds.

   16 Drams (dr.) make            1 Ounce (oz.)
   16 Ounces make                 1 Pound (pd.)
   25 Pounds make                 1 Quarter (qr.)
    4 Quarters, or 100 lbs., make 1 Hundredweight (cwt.)
   20 Hundredweights make         1 Ton (T.)
2,240 Pounds make                 1 Long ton (L. T.)


TROY WEIGHT.

For Gold, Silver, and Precious Metals.

24 Grains (gr.) make    1 Pennyweight (pwt.)
20 Pennyweights make    1 Ounce (oz.)
12 Ounces make          1 Pound (pd.)


APOTHECARIES WEIGHT.

For Drugs, Medicals and Chemicals.

20 Grains (gr.) make     1 Scruple (sc.)
 3 Scruples make         1 Dram (dr.)
 8 Drams make            1 Ounce (oz.)
12 Ounces make           1 Pound (pd.)

LINEAR MEASURE.

For Surveyors' Use.

12 Inches make         1 Foot
3 Feet make            1 Yard
5-1/2 Yards make       1 Rod
40 Rods make           1 Furlong
8 Furlongs             1 Mile


LONG MEASURE.

12 Inches make      1 Foot
3 Feet make         1 Yard
6 Feet make         1 Fathom
5-1/2 Yards make    1 Rod or pole
40 Poles make       1 Furlong
8 Furlongs make     1 Mile
3 Miles make        1 League
69-1/2 Miles make   1 Degree


SQUARE MEASURE.

144 square inches make      1 square foot
9 square feet make          1 square yard
30-1/2 square yards make    1 square pole
40 square poles make        1 square rod
4 square rods make          1 acre
640 square acres make       1 acre mile

SOLID OR CUBIC MEASURE.

1,728 Cubic inches make     1 Cubic foot
27 Cubic feet make          1 Cubic yard
128 Cubic feet make         1 Cord of wood
24-3/4 Cubic feet make      1 Perch of stone


DRY MEASURE.

2 Pints make        1 Quart (qt.)
8 Quarts make       1 peck (pk.)
4 Pecks make        1 Bushel (bu.)
36 Bushels make     1 Chaldron (ch.)


LIQUID MEASURE.

4 Gills (g.) make            1 Pint (pt.)
2 Pints make                 1 Quart (qt.)
4 Quarts make                1 Gallon (gal.)
31-1/2 Gallons make          1 Barrel (bbl.)
2 Bbls., or 63 gals., make.   1 Hogshead (hhd.)


PAPER MEASURE.

24 Sheets (sh.) make   1 Quire (qu.)
20 Quires make         1 Ream (r.)
10 Reams make          1 Bale (ba.) or bundle.

TABLE OF TEMPERATURES.

Greatest artificial cold   220   degrees below Fahr.
    "    natural      "     73.7    "      "      "
Mercury freezes             39      "      "      "
Mixture of snow and salt     4      "      "      "
Greatest density of water at 39.2   "    above    "
Blood Heat                   97.9   "      "      "
Alcohol boils               172.4   "      "      "
Water boils                 212     "      "      "
Mercury boils               662     "      "      "
Sulphur boils               824     "      "      "
Silver melts              1,749     "      "      "
Cast iron melts           2,786     "      "      "


STRENGTH OF VARIOUS METALS.

The tests are made by using a cubic inch of the metal and compressing
it, and by trying to draw apart a square inch of metal. Indicated in
pounds.

========================+=========+=============
                        | Tension | Compression
------------------------+---------+-------------
Aluminum                |  15,000 |   12,000
Brass, cast             |  24,000 |   30,000
Bronze, gun metal       |  32,000 |   20,000
  "     manganese       |  60,000 |  120,000
  "      phosphor       |  50,000 |   ......
Copper, cast            |  24,000 |   40,000
  "     wire annealed.  |  36,000 |   ......
  "       " unannealed  |  60,000 |   ......
Iron, cast              |  15,000 |   ......
  "     "  annealed     |  60,000 |   80,000
  "     "  unannealed   |  80,000 |   ......
  "   wrought           |  48,000 |   46,000
Lead, cast              |   2,000 |   ......
Steel castings          |  70,000 |   70,000
  "   plow              | 270,000 |   ......
  "   structural        |  60,000 |   60,000
  "   wire annealed     |  80,000 |   ......
  "   crucible          | 180,000 |   ......
Tin                     |   3,800 |    6,000
------------------------+---------+-------------

FREEZING MIXTURES

===============================================+=======================
                                               |Temperature Changes
                                               |in Degrees Fahrenheit
                                               +---------+------------
          Mixtures                             | From    |   To
-----------------------------------------------+---------+------------
Common salt, 1 part; snow, 3 parts             |   32    | zero .0
Common salt, 1 part; snow 1 part               |   32    |     -.4
Calcium chloride, 3 parts; snow 1 part         |   32    |     -27
Calcium chloride, 2 parts; snow 1 part         |   32    |     -44
Sal ammoniac, 5 parts; salt-peter 5 parts;     |         |
  water 16 parts.                              |   50    |     -10
Sal ammoniac, 1 part; salt-peter 1 part;       |         |
  water 1 part                                 |   46    |     -11
Ammonium nitrate, 1 part; water 1 part         |   50    |      -3
Potassium hydrate, 4 parts; snow 3 parts       |   32    |     -35
-----------------------------------------------+---------+------------

IGNITION TEMPERATURES.

Phosphorus                 120 degrees Fahrenheit
Bi-sulphide of carbon      300    "        "
Gun-cotton                 430    "        "
Nitro-glycerine            490    "        "
Phosphorus, amorphous      500    "        "
Rifle powder               550    "        "
Charcoal                   660    "        "
Dry pine wood              800    "        "
Oak                        900    "        "

POWER AND HEAT EQUIVALENTS.

In studying matters pertaining to power and heat, certain terms are
used, such as horsepower, horsepower-hours, watts, watt-hours, kilowatt,
kilowatt-hours, foot-pounds, joule, and B. T. U. (British Thermal Unit).

The following tables give a comprehensive idea of the values of the
different terms:

1 Horsepower-hour = 0.746 kilowatt-hour = 1,980,000 foot-pounds
                    of water evaporated at 212 degrees Fahrenheit,
                    raised from 62 degrees to 212 degrees.

1 Kilowatt-hour   = 1,000 watt-hours = 1.34 horse-power-hours
                    = 2,653,200 foot-pounds = 3,600,000 joules
                    = 3,420 B. T. U. = 3.54 pounds of water evaporated
                    at 212 degrees = 22.8 pounds of water raised from
                    62 to 212 degrees.

1 Horsepower      = 746 watts = 0.746 kilowatts.= 33,000 foot-pounds
                    per second = 2,550 B. T. U. per min. = 0.71
                    B. T. U. per second = 2.64 pounds of water
                    evaporated per hour at 212 degrees.

1 Kilowatt        = 1,000 watts = 1.34 horsepower = 2,653,200
                    foot-pounds per hour = 44,220 foot-pounds per
                    min. = 737 foot-pounds per second = 3,420
                    B. T. U. per hour = 57 B. T. U. per min. = 0.95
                    B. T. U. per second = 3.54 pounds of water
                    evaporated per hour at 212.

1 Watt            = 1 joule per second = 0.00134 horse-power = 0.001
                    kilowatt = 342 B. T. U. per hour = 44.22
                    foot-pounds per min. = 0.74 foot-pounds per second
                    = 0.0035 pounds of water evaporated per hour at
                    212 degrees.

1 B. T. U. (British Thermal Unit) = 1,052 watt-seconds = 778
                    foot-pounds = 0.252 calorie = 0.000292
                    kilowatt-hours = 0.000391 horsepower-hour
                    = 0.00104 pounds of water evaporated at 212
                    degrees.

1 Foot-pound      = 1.36 joule = 0.000000377 kilowatt-hour =
                    0.00129 B. T. U. = 0.0000005 horsepower-hour.

1 Joule           = 1 watt-second = 0.000000278 kilowatt-hour =
                    0.00095 B. T. U. = 0.74 foot-pounds.




CHAPTER XVII

INVENTIONS AND PATENTS, AND INFORMATION ABOUT THE RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF
INVENTORS AND WORKMEN


There is no trade or occupation which calls forth the inventive faculty
to a greater degree than the machinist's. Whether it be in the direction
of making some new tool, needed in some special work, or in devising a
particular movement, or mechanical expedient, the machinist must be
prepared to meet the issues and decide on the best structural
arrangement.

Opportunities also come daily to the workers in machine shops to a
greater extent than other artisans, because inventors in every line
bring inventions to them to be built and experimentally tested.

A knowledge of the rights and duties of inventors, and of the men who
build the models, is very desirable; and for your convenience we append
the following information:

The inventor of a device is he who has conceived an idea and has put it
into some concrete form.

A mere idea is not an invention.

The article so conceived and constructed, must be both _new_ and
_useful_. There must be some utility. It may be simply a toy, or
something to amuse.

If A has an idea, and he employs and pays B to work out the device, and
put it into practical shape, A is the inventor, although B may have
materially modified, or even wholly changed it. B is simply the agent or
tool to bring it to perfection, and his pay for doing the work is his
compensation.

An inventor has two years' time within which he may apply for a patent,
after he has completed his device and begun the sale of it. If he sells
the article for more than two years before applying for a patent, this
will bar a grant.

Two or more inventors may apply for a patent, provided each has
contributed something toward bringing it to its perfected state. Each
cannot apply separately. The patent issued will be owned by them
jointly.

Joint owners of a patent are not partners, unless they have signed
partnership papers respecting the patent. Because they are partners in
some other enterprise, disconnected from the patent, that does not
constitute them partners in the patent. They are merely joint owners.

If they have no special agreement with respect to the patent each can
grant licenses to manufacture, independently of the others, without
being compelled to account to the others, and each has a right to sell
his interest without asking permission of the others.

An _inventor_ is one who has devised an invention. A _patentee_ is one
who owns a patent, or an interest in one, be he the inventor or not.

The United States government does not grant Caveats. The only protection
offered is by way of patent.

A patent runs for a period of seventeen years, and may be renewed by act
of Congress only, for a further term of seven years.

An interference is a proceeding in the Patent Office to determine who is
the first inventor of a device. The following is a brief statement of
the course followed:

When two or more applicants have applications pending, which, in the
opinion of the Examiner, appear to be similar, the Office may declare an
interference.

If an applicant has an application pending, and the Examiner rejects it
on reference to a patent already issued, the applicant may demand an
interference, and the Office will then grant a hearing to determine
which of the two is entitled to the patent.

The first step, after the declaration of interference, is to request
that each applicant file a preliminary statement, under oath, in which
he must set forth the following:

First: The date of conception of the invention.

Second: Date of the first reduction to writing, or the preparation of
drawings.

Third: Date of making of the first model or device.

Fourth: When a complete machine was first produced.

These statements are filed in the Patent Office, and opened on the same
day, and times are then set for the respective parties to take
testimony.

If one of the parties was the first to conceive and reduce to practice,
as well as the first to file his application, he will be adjudged to be
the first inventor, without necessitating the taking of testimony.

If, on the other hand, one was the first to conceive, and the other the
first to file, then testimony will be required to determine the question
of invention.

The granting of a patent is not conclusive that the patentee was, in
reality, the first inventor. The law is that the patent must issue to
the _first_ inventor, and if it can be proven that another party was the
first, a new patent will issue to the one who thus establishes his
right. The Commissioner of Patents has no right to take away the patent
first issued. Only the Courts are competent to do this.

A patent is granted for the right to _make_, to _use_ and to _vend_.

An owner of a patent cannot sell the right only to make, or to sell, or
to use. Such a document would be a simple license, only, for that
particular purpose.

A patent may be sold giving a divided, or an undivided right.

A divided right is where a State, or any other particular territorial
right is granted. An undivided right is a quarter, or a half, or some
other portion in the patent itself.

If an inventor assigns his invention, and states in the granting clause
that he conveys "all his right and title in and to the invention," or
words to that effect, he conveys all his rights throughout the world.

If the conveyance says, "all rights and title in and throughout the
United States," he thereby reserves all other countries.

If a patent is issued, and the number and date of the patent are given,
the assignment conveys the patent for the United States only, unless
foreign countries are specifically mentioned.

To convey an invention or patent, some definite number or filing date
must be given in the document, with sufficient clearness and certainty
to show the intent of the assignor.

An invention does not depend on quantity, but on quality. It is that
which produces a new and a useful _result_.

In the United States patents are granted for the purpose of promoting
the useful arts and sciences.

In England, and in many other foreign countries, patents are granted,
not on account of any merit on the part of the inventor, but as a favor
of the crown, or sovereign.

Originally patents were granted by the crown for the exclusive privilege
in dealing in any commodity, and for this right a royal fee was exacted.
>From this fact the term _royalty_ originated.

An international agreement is now in force among nearly all countries,
which respects the filing of an application in any country, for a period
of one year in the other countries.

In making an application for a patent, a petition is required, a
specification showing its object, use, and particular construction,
followed by a claim, or claims, and accompanied by a drawing, if the
invention will permit of it, (which must be made in black, with India
ink), and an oath.

The oath requires the following assertions: That the applicant is the
first and original inventor of the device, and that he does not know
and does not believe the same was ever known or used before his
invention or more than two years before his application.

He must also further allege that the invention was not patented or
described in any printed publication here or abroad, and not
manufactured more than two years prior to the application, and that he
has not made an application, nor authorized any one to do so more than
two years prior to his application.

The first Government fee is $15, payable at the time of filing, and the
second and final fee is $20, payable at the time the patent is ordered
to issue.

The filing of an application for patent is a secret act, and the Patent
Office will not give any information to others concerning it, prior to
the issue of the patent.




GLOSSARY OF WORDS

USED IN TEXT OF THIS VOLUME


Abrupt.          Suddenly; coming without warning.

Abrasive.        A material which wears away.

Actuate.         Influenced, as by sudden motive; incited to action.

Accumulate.      To bring together; to amass; to collect.

Acoustics.       The branch of physics which treats of sound.

Adhesion.        To hold together; a molecular force by means of
                 which particles stick together.

Affinity.        Any natural drawing together; the property or force
                 in chemicals to move toward each other.

Aggravate.       To incite; to make worse or more burdensome.

Alloy.           A combination of two or more metals.

Altitude.        Height; a vertical distance above any point.

Alkali.          Any substance which will neutralize an acid, as lime,
                 magnesia, and the like.

Amalgam.         Any compound of metal which has mercury as one
                 of the elements.

Amiss.           Wrong, fault, misdeed.

Annealing.       A process of gradually heating and cooling metals,
                 whereby hardness and toughness are brought about.

Angle plate.     A metal structure which has two bodies, or limbs,
                 at right angles to each other.

Analysis.        The separating of substances into their elementary
                 forms.

Anchor bolt.     A structure intended to be placed in a hole in a wall,
                 and held there by a brew which expands a part
                 of the structure.

Apprentice.      One who is learning a trade or occupation.

Artificial.      That which resembles the original; made in imitation
                 of.

Arbor.           A shaft, spindle, mandrel, or axle.

Armature.        A metallic body within the magnetic field of a magnet.

Arbitrary.       Stubborn determination. Doing a thing without regard
                 to consequences.

Artisan.         One skilled in any mechanical art.

Attributable.    That which belongs to or is associated with.

Automatically.   Operating by its own structure, or without outside
                 aid.

Augmented.       Added to; to increase.

Auxiliary.       To aid; giving or furnishing aid.

Avoirdupois.     The system of weights, of which the unit is sixteen
                 ounces.

Back-saw.        A saw which has a rib at its upper margin.

Barleycorn.      A grain of barley.

Bastard.         A coarse-grained file.

B. T. U.         British Thermal Unit.

Back-gear.       That gear on a lathe for changing the feed.

Bevel.           Not in a right line; slanting; oblique.

Bibb.            A form of water faucet.

Bit, or bitt.    A form of tool for cutting purposes on a lathe, planer,
                 shaper, or drilling machine.

Borax.           A white crystalline compound, of a sweetish taste.
                 Chemically it is sodium biborate.

Buffs.           Usually a wheel covered with leather or cloth, and
                 having emery dust on it, for fine polishing purposes.

Buffeted.        Thrown back.

Bronze.          An alloy of copper and tin.

Calcium.         Lime.

Cant.            A form of lever.

Carbonate.       A salt of carbonic acid.

Caustic.         Capable of corroding or eating away.

Capillary.       That quality of a liquid which causes it to move
                 upwardly or along a solid with which it is in contact.

Caliper.         An instrument for spanning inside and outside
                 dimensions.

Centripetal.     The force which tends to draw inwardly, or to the
                 center.

Centrifugal.     The outwardly-moving force from a body.

Centering.       To form a point equidistant from a circular line.

Chloride.        A compound of chlorine with one or more positive
                 elements, such as, for instance, salt.

Circular pitch.  The measurement around a gear taken at a point
                 midway between the base and end of the teeth.

Circumference.   The outside of a circular body.

Clef.            A character placed on a staff of music to determine
                 the pitch.

Clutch.          A mechanical element for attaching one part to another.

Chuck, Independent. A disk of metal to be attached to the live spindle
                 of a lathe, and which has on its face a set of dogs
                 which move radially independently of each other.

Chuck, Universal. A disk to be attached as above, provided with dogs
                 which are connected so they move radially in unison
                 with each other.

Classified.      Arranged in order, in such a manner that each of a
                 kind is placed under a suitable heading.

Clearance.       To provide a space behind the cutting edge of a tool
                 which will not touch the work being cut.

Consistency.     Harmonious; not contradictory.

Coherer.         That instrument in a wireless telegraphy apparatus
                 which detects the electrical impulses.

Commutator.      The cylindrical structure on the end of an armature,
                 which is designed to change the polarity of the
                 current.

Concentrated.    Brought together at one point.

Coinage.         The system of making money from metals.

Compound.        The unity of two or more elements.

Constant.        Being insistent and consistent; also a term to be
                 used in a problem which never varies.

Conversion.      The change from one state to another.

Cone.            A body larger at one end than at another; usually
                 applied to a form which is cylindrical in shape
                 but tapering, from end to end.

Compression.     The bringing together of particles, or molecules.

Convolute.       A spiral form of winding, like a watch spring.

Coiled.          A form of winding, like a string wound around a
                 bobbin.

Conductivity.    Applied generally to the quality of material which
                 will carry a current of electricity; also a quality
                 of a material to convey heat.

Cohesion.        The force by which the molecules of the same kind
                 are held together.

Concentric.      A line which is equidistant at all points from a
                 center.

Confined.        Held within certain bounds.

Corpuscular.     Molecular or atomic form.

Converge.        To come together from all points.

Concave.         A surface which is depressed or sunken.

Convex.          A surface which is raised, or projects beyond the
                 surface of the edges.

Component.       One of the elements in a problem or in a compound.

Coefficient.     A number indicating the degree or quality possessed
                 by a substance. An invariable unit.

Cube.            A body having six equal sides.

Cross-section.   A term used to designate that line which is at right
                 angles to the line running from the view point.

Cross slide.     The metal plate on a lathe which holds the tool post,
                 and which is controlled, usually, by a screw.

Contiguous.      Close to; near at hand.

Countersink.     The depression around a bore.

Collet.          A collar, clutch or clamping piece, which has jaws
                 to hold a bar or rod.

Countershaft.    A shaft which has thereon pulleys or gears to connect
                 operatively with the gears or pulleys on a
                 machine, and change the speed.

Conducive.       Tending to; promotive of a result.

Corundum.        An extremely hard aluminum oxide used for polishing.

Cold chisel.     A term applied to an extremely hard chisel used for
                 cutting and chipping metal.

Combustion.      The action or operation of burning.

Conjunctively.   Acting together.

Comparatively.   Similitude or resemblance, one with another.

Cotter.          A key to prevent a wheel turning on its shaft.

Dead center.     A term used to designate the inoperative point of
                 the crank.

Depicting.       Showing; setting forth.

Deodorant.       A substance which will decompose odors.

Developer.       A chemical which will bring out the picture in making
                 the film or plate in photography.

Decimeter.       The length of one-tenth of a meter in the metric
                 system.

Decameter.       The length of ten meters in the metric system.

Defective.       Not perfect; wrong in some particular.

Diaphragm.       A plate, such as used in a telephone system, to receive
                 and transmit vibrations.

Dissolving.      To change from a solid to a liquid condition.

Division plate.  A perforated plate in a gear-cutting machine, to aid
                 in dividing the teeth of a wheel.

Dispelled.       To drive away or scatter.

Disinfectant.    A material which will destroy harmful germs.

Diametral pitch. The number of teeth in a gear as calculated on the
                 pitch line.

Dimension.       Measurement; size.

Ductility.       That property of metal which permits it to be drawn
                 out, or worked.

Dividers.        An instrument, like a compass, for stepping off
                 measurements, or making circles.

Diverge.         Spreading out from a common point.

Drift.           A cutting tool for smoothing a hole in a piece of
                 metal.

Duplex.          Two; double.

Dynamite.        An explosive composed of an absorbent, like earth,
                 combined with nitro-glycerine.

Dynamometer.     An instrument for measuring power developed.

Eccentric.       Out of center.

Echoes.          The reflection of sound.

Effervesce.      The action due to the unity of two opposite chemicals.

Efficiency.      The term applied to the quality of effectiveness.

Ellipse.         A form which is oblong, or having a shape, more or
                 less, like the longitudinal section of an egg.

Electrolytic.    The action of a current of water passing through a
                 liquid, and decomposing it, and carrying elements
                 from one electrode to the other.

Elasticity.      The quality in certain substances to be drawn out
                 of their normal shape, and by virtue of which they
                 will resume their original form when released.

Embedded.        To be placed within a body or substance.

Emerge.          To come out of.

Emphasize.       To lay particular stress upon.

Emery.           A hard substance, usually some of the finely divided
                 precious stones, and used for polishing and grinding
                 purposes.

Enormous.        A large amount; great in size.

Enunciated.      Proclaimed; given out.

Equalization.    To put on an even basis; to make the same
                 comparatively.

Eradicator.      To take out; to cause to disappear.

Escapement.      A piece of mechanism devised for the purpose of giving
                 a uniform rate of speed to the movement of
                 wheels.

Essential.       The important feature; the principal thing.

Expansion.       To enlarge; growing greater.

Equidistant.     The same distance from a certain point.

Evolved.         Brought out of; the result of certain considerations.

Facet.           A face.

Facilitated.     Made easy.

Flux.            Any substance which will aid in uniting material under
                 heat. The act of uniting.

Fluid.           Any substance in which the particles freely interchange
                 positions.

Flour emery.     Emery which is finely ground.

Flexible.        The quality of any material which will permit bending.

Float cut.       The term when applied to a tool where the cut is an
                 easy one.

Flexure.         The springing yield in a substance.

Foot pound.      A unit, usually determined by the number of pounds
                 raised one foot in one second of time. 550 pounds
                 raised one foot in one second of time, means so
                 many foot pounds.

Formulate.       To arrange; to put in order from a certain
                 consideration of things.

Focus.           The center of a circle.

Foci.            One of the points of an ellipse.

Formation.       The structure of a machine or of a compound.

Fractured.       Broken.

Fundamental.     Basis; the first form; the original structure.

Fulcrum.         The resting place for a lever.

Fusion.          Melting. The change of a metal from a solid to a liquid
                 state by heat.

Fusible.         That which is capable of being melted.

Fulminate.       A substance that will ignite or explode by heat or
                 friction.

Gamut.           The scale of sound or light, or vibrations of any kind.

Gear.            A toothed wheel of any kind.

Gelatine.        A tasteless transparent substance obtained from animal
                 tissues.

Globular.        Having the form of a globe or ball.

Glazed.          Having a glossary appearance.

Graphite.        A metallic, iron-black variety of carbon.

Graduated.       To arrange in steps; a regular order or series.

Grinder.         Any mechanism which abrades or wears down a substance.

Gullet.          The curved notches or grooves between projecting parts
                 of mechanism.

Harmonizing.     To make the various parts act together in unison.

H. P.            The symbol for horse power.

Helico.          A form resembling that of the threads of a screw.

Hexagon.         Six-sided.

Heliograph.      The system of signaling by using flashlights.

Horizontal.      Things level with the surface of the earth; like the
                 surface of water.

Hydrogen.        The lightest of all the elements. A tasteless,
                 colorless substance.

Import.          To bear, or convey as a meaning.

Impulse.         The application of an impelling force.

Impact.          A collision; striking against.

Invariably.      Constant; without failing.

Inertia.         The quality of all materials to remain at rest, or to
                 continue in motion, unless acted on by some external
                 force.

Intersect.       To divide at a certain point. The crossing point of one
                 line over another.

Interval.        A space; a distance between.

Intensity.       Strained or exerted to a high degree.

Interstices.     The spaces between the molecules or atoms in a
                 substance.

Intermediate.    Between.

Intermeshing.    The locking together of gear wheels.

Internal.        That which is within.

Inability.       Unable to perform or do.

Initial.         The first; at the start.

Increment.       One of the parts which go to make up the whole.

Inference.       Drawing a conclusion from a certain state of things.

Insoluble.       A substance which cannot be liquefied by a liquid.

Indentations.    Recesses, or cut-out parts or places.

Induction.       The movement of electricity through the air from
                 one conductor to another.

Inflammable.     That which will burn.

Inclining.       At an angle; sloping.

Inconsequential. Not of much importance.

Isometric.       That view of a figure which will give the relation
                 of all the parts in their proper proportions.

Jaw.             The grasping part of a vise, or other tool.

Joule.           The practical unit of electrical energy.

Key-way.         A groove in a shaft and in the hub of a wheel, to
                 receive therein a locking key.

Kilowatt.        A unit of electrical power; one thousand watts.

Kinetic.         Consisting of motion.

Lacing.          The attaching of the ends of a belt to each other.

Lap.             A tool, usually of copper or lead, on which flour emery
                 is spread, with oil, and used to grind out the interior
                 of cylinders.

Lapping.         The act of using a lap to grind out cylinders.

Lacquer.         A varnish for either wood or metal.

Lazy-tongs.      A form of tool, by means of which a long range of
                 movement is attainable, and great grasp of power.

Levigated.       Reduced to a fine powder.

Litharge.        A form of lead used in paints for drying purposes.

Longitudinal.    Lengthwise.

Luminous.        That which has the capacity to light up.

Magnet.          A bar of iron or steel that has electricity in it
                 capable of attracting certain metals.

Manipulation.    Capable of being handled.

Mandrel.         The revolving part of a lathe; a rod or bar which
                 turns and carries mechanical elements thereon.

Manually.        Operated by hand.

Margin.          An edge.

Malleability.    Softness. The state of being formed by hammering.

Magnetism.       A quality of certain metals to receive and hold a
                 charge of electricity.

Major axis.      The measurement across the longest part of an ellipse.

Minor axis.      The distance across the narrowest part of an ellipse.

Meridian.        The time when the sun crosses the middle of the
                 heavens; midday.

Metric.          Measure; a system which takes the unit of its
                 measurement from the circumference of the earth.

Micrometer.      A tool for measuring small spaces or intervals.

Milling machine. A large tool for the purpose of cutting gears and
                 grooves or surfaces.

Miter.           A meeting surface between two right-angled pieces.

Momentum.        That quality of matter which is the combined energy
                 of mass and speed.

Molecular.       Any substance that is made up of any particles; the
                 component elements in any substance.

Modifications.   Changes; improved arrangements.

Multiplicity.    Many; numerous; a large quantity.

Mutilated.       As applied to a gear, one in which certain teeth are
                 removed.

Nautical.        Marine; applied to shipping, and the like.

Neutralizes.     Any substance, like a chemical, which, when added
                 to another chemical, will change them both.

Nitro-glycerine. An explosive made from glycerine and nitrogen.

Oblique.         At an angle; inclined.

Obliterate.      To wipe out.

Obvious.         That which can be seen; easily observed.

Obtuse.          A blunt angle; not noticeable.

Odophone.        An instrument for determining and testing odors.

Olfactory.       The nerves of the sense of smell.

Orifice.         An opening; a hole.

Oscillation.     A movement to and fro, like a pendulum.

Oxygen.          The most universal gas, colorless and tasteless; is
                 called the acid-maker of the universe and unites
                 with all known substances, producing an acid, an
                 alkali, or a neutral compound.

Oxidizing.       To impart to any substance the elements of oxygen.

Oxide.           Any substance which has oxygen added to it.

Pallet.          A part of a tooth or finger which acts on the teeth
                 of a wheel.

Parallel.        Lines or sides at equal distance from each other from
                 end to end.

Paraffine.       A light-colored substance, produced from refined
                 petroleum.

Perimeter.       The outer margin of a wheel; the bounding line of any
                 figure of two dimensions.

Periphery.       The outer side of a wheel.

Peen.            The nailing end of a hammer.

Persistence.     That quality of all matter to continue on in its
                 present condition.

Perpendicular.   A line drawn at right angles to another.

Perpetual.       Without end.

Perspective.     A view of an object which takes in all parts at one
                 side.

Physically.      Pertaining to the body.

Phonautograph.   An apparatus for recording sound.

Phonograph.      An apparatus for taking and sending forth sound
                 vibration.

Phenomena.       Any occurrence in nature out of the ordinary.

Pitman.          The rod or bar which connects the piston and crank.

Pivot.           A point or bar on which anything turns.

Pinion.          A small toothed wheel.

Pitch.           The number of vibrations. The term used to give the
                 number of teeth in a wheel.

Pitch diameter.  The point from which the measurements are made in
                 determining the pitch.

Pivoted.         A bar, lever, or other mechanical element, arranged to
                 turn on or about a point.

Plastic.         A substance in such a state that it may be kneaded or
                 worked.

Planer.          A large tool designed to cut or face off wood or metal.

Porosity.        The quality in all substances to have interstices,
                 or points of separation, between the molecules.

Potential.       The power.

Properties.      The qualities possessed by all elements.

Projecting.      The throwing forward. The sending out.

Promulgated.     Put forth; enunciated.

Protractor.      A mechanic's and draughtsman's tool by means of
                 which angles may be formed.

Promote.         To carry forward in a systematic way.

Precision.       Work done with care; observing correct measurements.

Prony brake.     A machine for determining horse power.

Punch.           A small tool to be struck by a hammer in order to
                 make an impression or indentation.

Quadrant.        One-fourth of a circle.

Quadrant plate.  A plate on which are placed lines and numbers
                 indicating degrees.

Quadruplex.      A term to designate that system of telegraphy in
                 which four messages are sent over a single wire at
                 the same time.

Ratchet.         A wheel having teeth at certain intervals to catch
                 the end of a pawl or finger.

Ratchet brace.   A tool to hold a drill, having a reversible ratchet
                 wheel.

Rasp cut.        A cut of a file which is rough, not smooth.

Rake.            The angle or inclination of the upper surface of the
                 cutting tool of a lathe.

Reverse.         To turn about; in the opposite direction.

Reciprocating.   To go back and forth.

Revolve.         To move in an orbit or circle, as a merry-go-round.

Reciprocity.     To give back in like measure.

Reflection.      The throwing back from a surface.

Resonance.       The quality of vibration which adds to the original
                 movement, and aids in perpetuating the sound.

Refraction.      The quality of light which causes it to bend in passing
                 through different substances.

Reducing.        Bringing it down to a smaller compass.

Rectilinear.     A straight line.

Retort.          A furnace of refractory material to take high heat.

Reamer.          A tool designed to enlarge or to smooth out holes.

Regulation.      To do things in an orderly way; a system which sets
                 forth certain requirements.

Refractory.      Difficult to work, and not easily fused.

Recess.          A hole, or a depression.

Rocking.         A lever which rotates only part way and then moves in
                 the opposite direction.

Rotate.          A spindle which turns round. Compare revolve.

Rosin.           Certain gums; particularly the sap of pine trees.

Roughing.        The taking off of the first coating with a tool.

Saturated.       A soluble substance which cannot be further dissolved
                 by a liquid.

Scribe.          To mark with a tool.

Screw plate.     A tool which has within it means for adjusting
                 different cutting tools.

Section lining.  The marks made diagonally across drawings to indicate
                 that the part is cut away.

Shaper.          A large tool for surfacing off material, cutting
                 grooves, and the like.

Shrinkage.       The term applied to metals when cast, as all will be
                 smaller when cold than when cast in the mold.

Slide rest.      The part of the lathe which holds the tool post.

Sonorous.        Having the quality of vibration.

Slotted.         Grooved, or channeled.

Solvent.         That which can be changed from a solid by liquids.

Spelter.         A combination of zinc and copper. A hard solder.

Soldering.       Uniting of two substances by a third, with heat.

Spindle.         A small shaft.

Spur.            The larger of two intermeshing gears.

Socket.          A depression or hole.

Sprocket.        Teeth in a wheel to receive a chain.

Spiral.          A form wound like the threads of a screw.

Surface plate.   A true surface made of metal, used as a means of
                 determining evenness of the article made.

Sulphate.        Any substance which is modified by sulphuric acid.

Substitute.      An element or substance used for another.

Superposed.      One placed above the other.

Swage.           Tool for the purpose of changing the form in a
                 material.

Swivel.          A point on which another turns.

Surfacing.       Taking off the outer coating or covering.

Tap.             A small drill.

Tapering.        An object with the sides out of parallel.

Tangential.      A line from the periphery of a circle which projects
                 out at an angle.

Tension.         The exertion of a force.

Tenacity.        The property of a material to hang together.

Tempering.       Putting metal in such condition that it will be not
                 only hard but tough as well.

Technical.       Pertaining to the strict forms and terms of an art.

Texture.         That of which the element or substance is composed.

Threads.         The ridges, spiral in form, which run around a bolt.

Theoretically.   The speculative form or belief in a subject.

Tinned.          The term applied to the coating on a soldering iron
                 with a fluxed metal.

Tines.           Small blades.

Torsion.         The force exerted around an object, like the action of
                 a crank on a shaft.

Tommy.           A lever to be inserted in a hole in a screw head for
                 turning a screw.

Transmitting.    Sending forth; to forward.

Trammel.         A tool for the purpose of drawing ellipses.

Traction.        Drawing; pulling power.

Tripping.        A motion applied to a finger, which holds a pivoted
                 arm, whereby the latter may be swung from its
                 locked position.

Triangular.      Having three sides and three angles.

Transverse.      Across; at right angles to the long direction.

Undercut.        A wall of a groove or recess which is sloping.

Undulatory.      A wave-like motion, applied generally to light and
                 electricity.

Unit.            A base for calculating from.

Unison.          Acting together; as one.

Unsized.         Generally applied to the natural condition of paper
                 or fabric which has no glue or other fixing substance
                 on it.

Vaporising.      To change from a liquid or solid to a gas.

Variation.       Changing into different conditions; unlike forms.

Verge.           The edge; usually applied to the shoulder of a watch
                 spindle, particularly to the escapement.

Vertical.        Up and down. The direction of a plumb line.

Velocity.        The speed of an article through space.

Vitascope.       An instrument for determining the rate of vibration of
                 different substances.

Vibration.       The movement to and fro of all elements, and by means
                 of which we are made sensitive of the different forces.

Vocation.        The business or the calling of a person.

Warding.         The act of cutting a projection or guard, such as is
                 usually found on the insides of locks, and the
                 correspondent detent in the key.

Watt.            In electricity the unit of the rate of working in a
                 circuit.  It is the electro-motive force of one volt
                 and the current intensity of one ampere.




INDEX

(Figures indicate the pages)


A

Acetone, 165.

Acid, 119, 120, 156, 168.

Acid, Acetic, 165.

Acid, Carbolic, 166.

Acid, Hydrofluoric, 170.

Acid, Muriatic, 119.

Acid, Nitric, 168, 169, 171, 173.

Acid, Oxalic, 172.

Acid, Pyrogallic, 172.

Acid, Sulphuric, 169.

Acoustics, 87, 157.

Adhesives, 162.

Affinity, 83, 86.

Agate, 82.

Air, 84.

Alcohol, 165, 166, 169, 170, 176, 183.

Alloy, 81, 115, 116, 118, 119, 149, 175.

Alum, 149, 166, 172.

Aluminum, 38, 41, 42, 60, 82, 149, 164, 166, 169, 170, 174, 175, 176,
          184.

Amalgams, 149.

Amber, 170.

Ambergris, 159.

Ammonia, 166, 170.

Ammonium Nitrate, 185.

Ammonium Sulphate, 168, 171.

Analysis, 93.

Analyzed, 159.

Angle cutting, 30.

Angle plate, 10.

Angles, 31, 39, 59, 72, 102, 103, 104, 107, 152.

Aniline, 176.

Annatto, 168, 170.

Annealing, 112, 113, 114, 115.

Annular, 67.

Anvils, 14, 15, 16.

Apothecaries, 180.

Application for patent, 191.

Arbor, 14.

Arc, 146.

Area, 148.

Armature, 153.

Arrow root, 150.

Artisan, 112.

Asbestos, 168.

Asphalt, 14, 175.

Assign, 191, 193.

Assignment, 192.

Atom, 157.

Attraction, 86.

Avoirdupois, 180.

Axis, 106, 127.

Axis, major, 105.

Axis, minor, 105, 106.


B

Ball, 75.

Ball and Socket, 74.

Balsam Peru, 168, 189, 173.

Barium Chloride, 176.

Bark, soap, 165.

Barleycorn, 143.

Barrel, 149.

Base line, 102.

B. T. U., 180, 181.

Beeswax, 174.

Bell metal, 164.

Belt, 68.

Belt, Lacing, 68, 69.

Bench, 77, 104.

Benzine, 169.

Benzol, 173.

Bevel, 69, 70, 125, 126.

Bibb, 70.

Bismuth, 118.

Bisulphate of carbon, 185.

Bisulphate of sodium, 172.

Bitt, 28, 42.

Bitts, machine, 38.

Bitts, plain, 38.

Bitts, round-nosed, 38.

Bitts, setting, 39.

Bitts, square, 38.

Black, ivory, 171.

Blade, hack-saw, 35, 36.

Bloodstone, 173.

Blue black, 173.

Boiler, 150, 152.

Boiler, compound, 161.

Bolt, 75.

Bolt, anchor, 7.

Boracic acid, 168.

Borax, 168, 176.

Brass, 41, 43, 44, 168, 170, 174, 175, 176, 184.

Bronze, 150, 164, 173, 176, 184.

Bulk, 134.


C

Calcium, 166.

Calcium Chloride, 185.

Calipers, 37, 45, 49, 66.

Calls, 160.

Camphor, 164, 166, 175.

Canada balsam, 172.

Capillary attraction, 86, 87.

Carbolic acid, 166.

Carbon, 113.

Carbonate, 150.

Carbonate of soda, 116, 172.

Carbon paper, 171.

Cardinal, 102.

Carbolized, 169.

Cast iron, 42, 64, 81, 169, 183.

Caustic soda, 106, 150.

Caveat, 190.

Celluloid, 164.

Cement, 162, 163.

Centaire, 146.

Center, dead, 78.

Center line, 41.

Centering, 111.

Centers, 62.

Centimeter, 146.

Centrifugal, 85.

Centripetal, 85.

Ceresine, 174.

Chalk, 165.

Channel, 71.

Charcoal, 113, 167, 185.

Chemical, 83, 157, 180.

Chisels, drifting, 32.

Chisels, key-way, 32.

Chisels, square, 53.

Chlorate of potash, 167, 169, 170.

Chloride of lime, 165.

Chloride of platinum, 173.

Chloride of tin, 119.

Chloride of zinc, 163, 176.

Chloral hydrate, 169.

Chloroform, 163.

Chromate of potash, 169, 170.

Chuck, 54.

Chuck, independent, 64.

Chuck, universal, 64.

Circle, 96, 106, 107, 111, 148, 169.

Circuit, 153, 154.

Circular pitch, 122, 124, 125.

Circumference, 148.

Citric, 165.

Clamp, 77.

Clay, 164, 185.

Clearance, 30, 38, 40.

Clef, 159.

Clutches, 74.

Coal, 139.

Coherer, 154.

Cohesion, 50, 83.

Color, 92, 157, 161.

Combination, 136, 156.

Commutator, 155.

Compass, 106.

Compound, Welding, 117.

Compression, 77, 84.

Compressibility, 84.

Concave, 92, 93.

Concentric, 88.

Conception, 191.

Conductivity, 82.

Conductor, 82, 88.

Cone, 70.

Conveyor, 91.

Convex, 92, 96.

Convolute, 78.

Copal varnish, 163.

Copper, 45, 60, 112, 118, 164, 170, 173, 174, 184.

Corpuscular, 91.

Corundum, 27.

Crank, 70, 76, 78, 135.

Cream of Tartar, 165, 174.

Crown wheel, 70.

Cryolite, 176.

Cube, 97, 98, 107, 149.

Current, 154, 158.

Curve, 104.

Cutter, side, 30.

Cutting tool, 171.

Cyanide of Potassium, 170.

Cylinder, 39, 40, 66, 80, 90, 134, 135, 136.


D

Decameter, 146, 106, 109, 183, 187.

Decimeter, 146.

Declaration of Interference, 190.

Degree, 40, 101, 102, 103, 104.

Deodorant, 166.

Dessertspoon, 151.

Detail, paper, 111.

Develop, 157.

Developer, 172.

Dextrine, 169.

Diameter, 52, 126, 140, 143, 144, 148, 149, 150.

Diameter, inside, 122.

Diameter, outside, 122.

Diameter, pitch, 122.

Diametral pitch, 123, 124.

Diamond, 81, 149.

Diaphragm, 90, 153, 154.

Disinfectant, 163.

Disks, 49, 50, 67, 71, 74, 75, 82, 91, 95, 96, 105.

Disk shears, 90, 153, 154.

Distilled, 144, 151.

Diverge, 91.

Divided, 192.

Dividers, 45, 52, 62, 63.

Dogs, 77.

Dollar, 144.

Drams, 180.

Drawing, 95, 97, 101, 108, 109, 129, 191.

Drill, 30, 31.

Drilling Machine, 43.

Driver, 73.

Dry measure, 182.

Ductility, 80, 81.

Dynamite, 167.

Dynamo, 155.


E

Eccentric, 78.

Echo, 89.

Effervesce, 119.

Elastic, 91.

Elasticity, 87, 112.

Electrical, 82, 153, 154, 155.

Electric current, 182.

Electric curves, 182.

Electricity, 78, 84, 93.

Electrolytic, 149.

Electro-motive force, 154.

Ellipse, 72, 104, 105, 106, 107.

Emery, 27, 36, 150, 165, 166, 167.

Emery cloth, 55.

Emery wheel, 22.

Energy, 140.

Engine, 45, 78, 134.

Equalization, 82.

Escapement, 72.

Ether, 91, 169.

Expansion, 93.

Explosions, 156, 167.


F

Facet, 52.

Fahrenheit, 148, 186.

Feed, longitudinal, 66.

Feed, transverse, 66.

Ferric chloride, 166.

Filament, 160.

File, cross, 57.

File, cutter, 56.

File, do-able end, 57, 58.

File, equalizing, 57.

File, float cut, 57.

File, half round, 56.

File, holding, 59.

File, middle, 57.

File, movement, 59, 80.

File, pinion, 56.

File, rasp cut, 57.

File, rat-tail, 56.

File, rough, 57.

File, round, 56.

File, saw, 56.

File, second cut, 57.

File, shearing cut, 59.

File, slitting, 57.

File, smooth, 57.

File, square, 56.

File, triangular, 56.

Files, 36, 48, 50, 52, 53, 56, 59, 60, 114, 167, 168.

Files, Hexagon, 51, 52.

Filing, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 61.

Filter paper, 171.

Fire clay, 164, 165.

Fish oil, 171,176.

Fire proof, 168, 171.

Flexure, 79.

Floor dressing, 168.

Fluid, 165.

Fluor spar, 116.

Fluxes, 115, 116, 118, 176.

Focal, 106, 107.

Focus, foci, 105.

Foot, 145.

Foot lathe, 78.

Foot pounds, 139, 140, 143, 181.

Force, 156, 157.

Forge work, 116.

Forges, 164.

Formic acid, 168.

Formula, 162.

Freezing mixtures, 185.

Friction, 70, 171.

Fuel, 134, 181.

Fulcrum, 76, 128, 129.

Fulminate, 167.

Furlong, 181.

Furniture, 164.

Fusible, 116.

Fusion, 115.


G

Gage, 45, 46, 47, 148.

Gage surface, 84, 87, 94.

Gallon, 144.

Gas stove, 166.

Gear, 42, 69, 70, 74, 121, 122, 123, 125, 126, 133, 171.

Gear, bevel, 70.

Gear, friction, 70.

Gearing, 121.

Gear, miter, 70, 123, 124, 125, 126.

Gear, mutilated, 72.

Gear, spur, 122.

Gelatine, 162, 173.

Geranium, 169.

German silver, 82.

Giant powder, 167.

Glass, 84, 92, 112, 163, 169.

Glauber salts, 164.

Glazing, 72.

Glue, 159, 162, 168.

Glycerine, 115, 162, 165, 176.

Gold, size, 173.

Grain, 81.

Grains, 180.

Graphite, 171, 175.

Gravity, 85.

Grinder, 27.

Grinder wheels, 36.

Grindstones, 22, 36, 149.

Groove, 71, 76.

Gum, 163.

Gum arabic, 163.

Gum lac, 170.

Guncotton, 188.

Gunpowder, 167.


H

Hack-saw, 34, 35, 36.

Hack-saw blade, 35, 36.

Hammer, 81, 115, 117.

Handy tables, 178.

Hardness, 81, 114, 115.

Harmony, 154, 158, 169, 160.

Head, 135.

Heat, 93, 186.

Hectare, 146.

Hectometer, 146.

Helical, 77.

Helical, double, 77.

Helix-volute, 77.

Hexagon, 51, 52.

Horizontal, 97, 102, 106.

Horse power, 139, 143, 146, 148, 186, 187.

Hours, H. P., 186, 187.

Hours, kilowatt, 186, 187.

Hub, 74.

Hub, key-way, 125.

Hydrochloric acid, 172.

Hydrofluoric acid, 149.

Hydrogen, 83.


I

Inches, 181.

Inclined plane, 123, 128.

Indentation, 154.

Indicator, speed, 140.

Induction, 154.

Inertia, 84.

Injector, 152.

Inks, 110.

Inside diameter, 122.

Instrument, 158, 159.

Internal, 86, 102.

International, 193.

Invention, 152, 153, 161, 188, 189, 190, 192, 193, 194.

Inventor, 157, 181, 190.

Iron, 42, 63, 155, 162, 165, 169, 175, 184.

Iron, wrought, 42, 82, 112.

Isinglass, interference, 190.

Isometric, 107.

Ivory, 84.

Ivory, black, 171.


J

Japan wax, 174.

Joint, ball and socket, 74.

Joint, universal, 70.

Joule, 174.


K

Kerosene, 150, 165, 171.

Key, 158.

Key-way, 125.

Kilometer, 146.

Kilowatt, 186, 187.

Kilowatt hour, 186, 187.

Kinetic, 140.


L

Lacquer, 170.

Lampblack, 167, 175.

Lapping, 166, 167.

Lathe, 28, 39, 42, 45, 64, 65, 67, 104, 171.

Lathe speed, 34.

Lathe tool, 33, 39.

Lavender, 168.

Lead, 60, 118, 163, 164,175.

Leather, 162, 163.

Level, 87.

Lever, 73, 75, 76, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 140, 153.

Leverage, 143.

Licenses, 189.

Light, 100.

Lime, 173.

Linear measure, 181.

Lines, 95, 99, 110.

Lines, section, 84.

Linseed, 162.

Linseed oil, 149, 174,175.

Liquid measure, 182.

Liquids, 84.

Litharge, 163.

Long measure, 181.

Lubricant, 171.

Luminous, 91.

Lycopodium, 169.


M

Machine, 26.

Magnesium, 166.

Magnesium sulphate, 169.

Magnet, 153.

Magnetism, 93.

Major axis, 105.

Malleability, 81.

Malleable, 112.

Mandrel, 66, 76.

Manganese, 163.

Marble, 162.

Mass, 85.

Mastic, 169.

Measure, 139, 140, 143, 151.

Measure, liquid, 182.

Measure, long, 181.

Measurement, 145.

Measure, paper, 182.

Measure, solid, 82.

Measure, square, 181.

Membrane, 90.

Mercuric chloride, 166.

Mercury, 94, 114, 183.

Meridian, 145.

Metric, 144, 145, 146.

Metrical, 145.

Micron, 146.

Microscope, 91.

Millimeter, 146.

Milling machine, 26.

Minor, 164.

Minor axis, 105, 106.

Miter, 146.

Miter gear, 123, 124, 125, 126.

Molecular, 82, 117.

Molecular forces, 82.

Molecules, 83, 84, 146.

Momentum, 83, 85.

Motion, 84, 156.

Motor, 136, 155.


N

Neat's Foot oil, 168.

Neroli, 168.

Nickel, 164.

Nitrate of copper, 174.

Nitrate of potash, 167.

Nitrate of silver, 174.

Nitric acid, 162, 168, 169, 171, 173.

Nitro-glycerine, 167, 185.


O

Oath, 193.

Octave, 159.

Odophone, 159.

Odor, 159.

Oil, 83, 87, 167, 171.

Oil eradicator, 166.

Oleonaptha, 171.

Oscillations, 90, 157.

Ounce, 180.

Outlines, 99.

Oxalic acid, 172.

Oxidation, 117.

Oxide, 117, 163.

Oxidizing, 116.

Oxygen, 83, 119.


P

Palm oil, 171.

Paper, 168, 171.

Paraffine, 168, 171.

Parallel, 91, 100, 121.

Paris blue, 172.

Paste, 163, 173.

Patents, 188, 189, 190, 192, 194.

Pawl, 73, 76.

Pendulum, 73.

Parting tools, 28.

Perimeter, 73.

Periphery, 73.

Permanganate of potash, 178.

Perpendicular, 105.

Perpetual motion, 128.

Perspective, 97, 106, 107.

Petroleum, 168.

Phenomenon, 91, 153.

Phonautograph, 90.

Phonograph,-91, 154.

Phosphorus, 149.

Photographer, 157, 172.

Piano, 158, 159.

Pinion, 57, 74.

Pitch, 121, 125, 156.

Pitch, circle, 122, 124, 125.

Pitch, diameter, 123, 124.

Pitch, line, 123, 124, 127.

Pitman, 70.

Pivots, 70, 130.

Planer, 26, 50, 51, 126.

Plaster, 173.

Plaster of Paris, 150, 174.

Plate, 73.

Plates, 50.

Plating, 173.

Platinum, 81.

Plumbago, 173.

Poles, 155.

Polishes, 174.

Position, 102.

Potash, 116, 167.

Potash, prussiate, 113.

Potassium cyanide, 170.

Potassium nitrate, 167.

Pound, 145, 157, 180.

Power, 128, 129, 130, 131, 133, 134, 140, 158, 159, 186.

Power, horse, 139, 140.

Precision tools, 50.

Preliminary statement, 191.

Pressure, 134, 135, 137, 148, 152.

Prime mover, 134.

Printing telegraph, 155.

Prism, 92, 93.

Protractor, 108, 109.

Prussiate of potash, 113.

Pulley, 68, 70, 73, 128, 133, 140, 149, 150.

Pulsation, 153.

Pumice, 83.

Pumice stone, 110, 175.

Punch, 62, 63.

Punch, centering, 62.

Punch cutter, 24.

Putty, 175.


Q

Quadrant, 102, 103.

Quality, 157.

Quarter, 180.

Quartz, 182.


R

Racks, 73, 74.

Radius, 52.

Rake, 29, 30, 38, 42, 43,45.

Rainbow, 92.

Ratchet, 77.

Ratchet brace, 77.

Reciprocity, 82.

Reflected, 92.

Reflecting, 89.

Reflection, 88, 91.

Refraction, 92.

Resin, 176.

Resistance, 79, 82, 83.

Resonance, 89.

Rim, 96.

Ring, 96.

Rods, 180.

Rosemary, 166.

Royalty, 193.

Rubber, 84, 163.

Rule, 53.

Rule, key-seat, 53, 54.

Rust preventive, 175.


S

Saffro, 170.

Sal ammoniac, 119, 162, 165, 176, 185.

Salt, 165, 170, 183, 185.

Sandarac, 169, 176.

Saw, 26, 64, 76.

Saw, wabble, 76.

Scale, 100, 101.

Science, 157.

Scraper, 50, 51.

Scribe, 47, 53.

Scruples, 180.

Sealing wax, 176.

Section lining, 103, 104, 110.

Sense, 159.

Sesame oil, 176.

Shade, 96.

Shading, 96, 110.

Shaft, 68, 69, 70, 73, 74, 75.

Shaft coupling, 74.

Shaper, 26, 50, 51, 53.

Shellac, 163.

Side cutters, 30.

Sienna, 168.

Signals, 87.

Silicate, 168.

Silver, 82, 118, 164, 165, 180, 183.

Snow, 185.

Soap, 165, 172.

Soap spirits, 166.

Soda, sulphate, 172.

Sodium carbonate, 172.

Sodium silicate, 168.

Sodium sulphate, 172.

Solder, 118, 175.

Solder, hard, 118.

Solder, soft, 118.

Soldering, 116, 117, 119, 176.

Solids, 84.

Sonorous, 88.

Sound, 87.

Sounding-boards, 88.

Spanish white, 168.

Spectroscope, 90, 93, 161.

Spectrum, 93.

Speed, 43.

Spelter, 118.

Sphere, 97.

Spiral, 78.

Sponge, 83.

Spring, 72, 79, 176.

Square, 48, 61, 63.

Square combination, 24, 77, 81.

Starch, 162, 163, 164.

Steel, 39, 40, 42, 44, 63, 79, 113, 165, 168, 169, 170, 184.

Stethoscope, 90.

Stove polish, 174, 175.

Straight edge, 61.

Stylus, 90.

Sugar, 163.

Sulphate of copper, 174.

Sulphate of potash, 115.

Sulphate of soda, 172.

Sulphur, 167, 183.

Sulphuric acid, 165, 169, 175.

Surfacing, 49, 50, 63.


T

Table of weights, 178.

Talcum, 169.

Tallow, 176.

Tannaform, 169.

Taps, 45.

Taste, 160.

Teeth, 72.

Telegram, 158.

Telescope, 91, 92.

Temperature, 82, 88, 114, 116, 118, 119.

Temperature table, 180.

Tempering, 113, 114, 115,176.

Tenacity, 79, 80.

Thread, 74.

Thymol, 166.

Tin, 98, 118, 175, 176, 184.

Ton, 180.

Tongs, 75.

Tongs, lazy, 75.

Tool, 22, 28, 40, 41, 61, 64, 71, 108, 113, 175.

Tool boring, 43.

Tool cutting, 26, 29, 45, 64.

Tool holder, 64.

Tool hook, 28.

Tool, hooked, 44.

Tool knife, 28.

Tool, parting, 28.

Tool, roughing, 29.

Tools, precision, 50.

Torsion, 79.

Toughness, 114, 115.

Tracing cloth, 110.

Tracing paper, 172.

Traction, 79.

Transmitting, 158.

Transparent, 163.

Transverse, 80.

Treadle, 78.

Triangular, 97, 98.

Tripping driver, 78.

Turmeric, 170.

Turpentine, 162, 165, 172, 173, 174, 175.

Turpentine, Venice, 176, 177.


U

Ultramarine, 171.

Undivided, 192.

Undulatory, 91.

Unguent, 114.


V

Valve, 70.

Vapor, 87.

Varnish, 162, 170, 172, 175, 176.

Vaseline, 165, 175.

Velocity, 81, 87, 91.

Vermilion, 177.

Vertical, 97.

Vibrate, 160, 161.

Vibration, 87, 88, 90, 158.

Vibratory, 91.

Vinegar, 163, 170, 173.

Violin, 159.

Vise, 33.

Vitascope, 90.


W

Water, 165, 166, 168, 172, 183, 186, 187.

Waterproof, 162, 163.

Weight, 85.

Weight of steel, 179.

Weight, troy, 180.

Welding, 115, 116, 117.

Welding compound, 117.

Wheel, 27, 72, 73, 85, 86.

Whiting, 174.

Workshop, 162.

Wrench, 104.


Y

Yokes, 70, 76.


Z

Zinc, 118, 119, 164, 166, 175.

Zinc chloride, 163.




THE BOYS' ELITE SERIES

_12mo, cloth. Price 75c each._

Contains an attractive assortment of books for boys by standard and
favorite authors. Printed from large, clear type on a superior quality
of paper, bound in a superior quality of binders' cloth, ornamented with
illustrated original designs on covers stamped in colors from unique and
appropriate dies. Each book wrapped in attractive jacket.

1. Cudjo's Cave                              Trowbridge
2. Green Mountain Boys
3. Life of Kit Carson                   Edward L. Ellis
4. Tom Westlake's Golden Luck            Perry Newberry
5. Tony Keating's Surprises    Mrs. G. R. Alden (Pansy)
6. Tour of the World in 80 Days             Jules Verne


THE GIRLS' ELITE SERIES

_12mo, cloth. Price 75c each._

Contains an assortment of attractive and desirable books for girls by
standard and favorite authors. The books are printed on a good quality
of paper in large clear type. Each title is complete and unabridged.
Bound in clothene, ornamented on the sides and back with attractive
illustrative designs and the title stamped on front and back.

1. Bee and the Butterfly     Lucy Foster Madison
2. Dixie School Girl        Gabrielle E. Jackson
3. Girls of Mount Morris          Amanda Douglas
4. Hope's Messenger         Gabrielle E. Jackson
5. The Little Aunt           Marion Ames Taggart
6. A Modern Cinderella            Amanda Douglas


_For sale by all Booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of 75c_




THE "HOW-TO-DO-IT" BOOKS

By J. S. ZERBE


Carpentry for Boys

A book which treats, in a most practical and fascinating manner all
subjects pertaining to the "King of Trades"; showing the care and use of
tools; drawing; designing, and the laying out of work; the principles
involved in the building of various kinds of structures, and the
rudiments of architecture. It contains over two hundred and fifty
illustrations made especially for this work, and includes also a
complete glossary of the technical terms used in the art. The most
comprehensive volume on this subject ever published for boys.


Electricity for Boys

The author has adopted the unique plan of setting forth the fundamental
principles in each phase of the science, and practically applying the
work in the successive stages. It shows how the knowledge has been
developed, and the reasons for the various phenomena, without using
technical words so as to bring it within the compass of every boy. It
has a complete glossary of terms, and is illustrated with two hundred
original drawings.


Practical Mechanics for Boys

This book takes the beginner through a comprehensive series of practical
shop work, in which the uses of tools, and the structure and handling of
shop machinery are set forth; how they are utilized to perform the work,
and the manner in which all dimensional work is carried out. Every
subject is illustrated, and model building explained. It contains a
glossary which comprises a new system of cross references, a feature
that will prove a welcome departure in explaining subjects. Fully
illustrated.

_12mo, cloth. Price $1.00 each._


_For sale by all Booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of $1.00._




The American Boy's Sports Series

BY MARK OVERTON

12 Mo Cloth. Illustrated. Price 60c Each.

       *       *       *       *       *

These stories touch upon nearly every sport in which the active boy is
interested. Baseball, rowing, football, hockey, skating, ice-boating,
sailing, camping and fishing all serve to lend interest to an unusual
series of books. There are the following four titles:

1. Jack Winters' Baseball Team; or, The
   Mystery of the Diamond.

2. Jack Winters' Campmates; or, Vacation
   Days in the Woods.

3. Jack Winters' Gridiron Chums; or, When
   the Half-back Saved the Day.

4. Jack Winters' Iceboat Wonder; or, Leading
   the Hockey Team to Victory.

       *       *       *       *       *

Phil Bradley

Mountain Boy's Series

BY SILAS R. BOONE

12 Mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Price 60c Each

       *       *       *       *       *

These books describe with interesting detail the experience of a party
of boys among the mountain pines. They teach the young reader how to
protect themselves against the elements, what to do and what to avoid,
and above all to become self-reliant and manly. There are five titles:

1. Phil Bradley's Mountain Boys; or, The
   Birch Bark Lodge.

2. Phil Bradley at the Wheel; or, The Mountain
   Boys' Mad Auto Dash.

3. Phil Bradley's Shooting Box; or, The
   Mountain Boys on Currituck Sound.

4. Phil Bradley's Snow-shoe Trail; or, The
   Mountain Boys in the Canadian Wilds.

5. Phil Bradley's Winning Way.

       *       *       *       *       *

For sale by all Booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of 60c.




GIRLS' LIBERTY SERIES

Contains an assortment of attractive and desirable books for girls by
standard and favorite authors. The books are printed on a good quality
of paper in large clear type. Each title is complete and unabridged.
Bound in clothene, ornamented on the sides and back with attractive
illustrative designs and the title stamped on front and back.

_12mo, clothene. Price 50c each._

 1. Camp Fire Girls on a Long Hike, or,
    Lost in the Great Northern Woods     Stella M. Francis

 2. Daddy's Girl                          Mrs. L. T. Meade

 3. Ethel Hollister's First Summer as
    a Camp Fire Girl                  Irene Elliott Benson

 4. Ethel Hollister's Second Summer   Irene Elliott Benson

 5. Flat Iron for a Farthing                    Mrs. Ewing

 6. Four Little Mischiefs                  Rose Mulholland

 7. Girls and I                            Mrs. Molesworth

 8. Girl from America                     Mrs. L. T. Meade

 9. Grandmother Dear                       Mrs. Molesworth

10. Irvington Stories                     Mary Mapes Dodge

11. Little Lame Prince                         Mrs. Muloch

12. Little Susie Stories                  Mrs. H. Prentiss

13. Mrs. Over the Way               Julianna Horatio Ewing

14. Naughty Miss Bunny                     Rose Mulholland

15. Sweet Girl Graduate                   Mrs. L. T. Meade

16. School Queens                         Mrs. L. T. Meade

17. Sue, A Little Heroine                 Mrs. L. T. Meade

18. Wild Kitty                            Mrs. L. T. Meade

       *       *       *       *       *

_For sale by all Booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of 50c_




THE WONDER ISLAND BOYS

By ROGER T. FINLAY

_12mo, cloth. Price 75c each, postpaid._

Thrilling adventures on land and sea of two boys and a man cast upon an
island in the South Seas without food or weapons; their experience in
fashioning clothing, tools and weapons, and in overcoming nature and
subduing and civilizing savage tribes; covers a wide range of subjects.

 1. The Castaways
 2. Exploring the Island
 3. The Mysteries of the Caverns
 4. The Tribesmen
 5. The Capture and Pursuit
 6. The Conquest of the Savages
 7. Adventures on Strange Islands
 8. Treasures of the Islands


THE BOY GLOBE TROTTERS

By ELBERT FISHER

_12mo, cloth. Price 75c each, postpaid._

This is a series of form books relating the adventures of two boys who
made a trip around the world, working their way as they go. They meet
with various peoples having strange habits and customs, and their
adventures from a medium for the introduction of much instructive matter
relative to the character and industries of the cities and countries
through which they pass. A description is given of the native sports of
boys in each of the foreign countries through which they travel. The
books are illustrated by decorative head and end pieces for each
chapter, there being 36 original drawings in each book, all by the
author, and four striking halftones.

 1. From New York to the Golden Crate
 2. From San Francisco to Japan
 3. From Tokio to Bombay
 4. From India to the War Zone

       *       *       *       *       *

_For sale by all Booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of 75c_




BOYS' COPYRIGHTED BOOKS

Printed from large, clear type on a superior quality of paper,
embellished with original illustrations by eminent artists, and bound in
a superior quality of book binders' cloth, ornamented with illustrated
covers, stamped in colors from unique and appropriate dies, each book
wrapped in a glazed paper wrapper printed in colors.


MOTOR BOAT BOYS SERIES

By Louis Arundel

1. The Motor Club's Cruise Down the Mississippi; or, The Dash
   for Dixie.

2. The Motor Club on the St. Lawrence River; or, Adventures
   Among the Thousand Islands.

3. The Motor Club on the Great Lakes; or, Exploring the Mystic
   Isle of Mackinac.

4. Motor Boat Boys Among the Florida Keys; or, The Struggle for
   the Leadership.

5. Motor Boat Boys Down the Coast; or, Through Storm and
   Stress.

6. Motor Boat Boys' River Chase.

THE BIRD BOYS SERIES

By John Luther Langworthy

1. The Bird Boys; or, The Young Sky Pilots' First Air Voyage.

2. The Bird Boys on the Wing; or, Aeroplane Chums in the Tropics.

3. The Bird Boys Among the Clouds; or, Young Aviators in a
   Wreck.

4. Bird Boys' Flight; or, A Hydroplane Round-up.

5. Bird Boys' Aeroplane Wonder; or, Young Aviators on a Cattle
   Ranch.

CANOE AND CAMPFIRE SERIES

By St. George Rathborne

1. Canoe Mates in Canada; or, Three Boys Afloat on the Saskatchewan.

2. Young Fur Takers; or, Traps and Trails in the Wilderness.

3. The House Boat Boys; or, Drifting Down to the Sunny South.

4. Chums in Dixie; or, The Strange Cruise in the Motor Boat.

5. Camp Mates in Michigan; or, With Pack and Paddle in the Pine
   Woods.

6. Rocky Mountain Boys; or, Camping in the Big Game Country.
       *       *       *       *       *

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of 75c




BOYS' COPYRIGHTED BOOKS

Printed from large, clear type on a superior quality of paper,
embellished with original illustrations by eminent artists, and bound in
a superior quality of book binders' cloth, ornamented with illustrated
covers, stamped in colors from unique and appropriate dies, each book
wrapped in a glazed paper wrapper printed in colors.


MOTOR BOAT BOYS SERIES

By Louis Arundel

1. The Motor Club's Cruise Down the Mississippi; or, The Dash
   for Dixie.

2. The Motor Club on the St. Lawrence River; or, Adventures
   Among the Thousand Islands.

3. The Motor Club on the Great Lakes; or, Exploring the Mystic
   Isle of Mackinac.

4. Motor Boat Boys Among the Florida Keys; or, The Struggle for
   the Leadership.

5. Motor Boat Boys Down the Coast; or, Through Storm and
   Stress.

6. Motor Boat Boys' River Chase.

THE BIRD BOYS SERIES

By John Luther Langworthy

1. The Bird Boys; or, The Young Sky Pilots' First Air Voyage.

2. The Bird Boys on the Wing; or, Aeroplane Chums in the Tropics.

3. The Bird Boys Among the Clouds; or, Young Aviators in a
   Wreck.

4. Bird Boys' Flight; or, A Hydroplane Round-up.

5. Bird Boys' Aeroplane Wonder; or, Young Aviators on a Cattle
   Ranch.

CANOE AND CAMPFIRE SERIES

By St. George Rathborne

1. Canoe Mates in Canada; or, Three Boys Afloat on the Saskatchewan.

2. Young Fur Takers; or, Traps and Trails in the Wilderness.

3. The House Boat Boys; or, Drifting Down to the Sunny South.

4. Chums in Dixie; or, The Strange Cruise in the Motor Boat.

5. Camp Mates in Michigan; or, With Pack and Paddle in the Pine
   Woods.

6. Rocky Mountain Boys; or, Camping in the Big Game Country.

       *       *       *       *       *

For sale by all booksellers, or sent postpaid on receipt of 75c




ALWAYS _ASK FOR THE_ DONOHUE

Complete Editions and you will get the best for the least money


Henty Series

_FOR BOYS_

G. A. Henty was the most prolific writer of boy's stories of the
nineteenth century. From two to five books a year came from his facile
pen. No Christmas holidays were complete without a new "Henty Book."
This new series comprises 45 titles. They are printed on an extra
quality of paper, from new plates and bound in the best quality of
cloth, stamped on back and side in inks from unique and attractive dies.
12 mo. cloth. Each book in a printed wrapper.

  1 Among Malay Pirates
  2 Bonnie Prince Charlie
  3 Boy Knight, The
  4 Bravest of the Brave
  5 By England's Aid
  6 By Pike and Dyke
  7 By Right of Conquest
  8 By Sheer Pluck
  9 Captain Bayley's Heir
 10 Cat of Bubastes
 11 Col. Thorndyke's Secret
 12 Cornet of Horse, The
 13 Dragon and the Raven
 14 Facing Death
 15 Final Reckoning, A
 16 For Name and Fame
 17 For the Temple
 18 Friends, Though Divided
 19 Golden Canon
 20 In Freedom's Cause
 21 In the Reign of Terror
 22 In Times of Peril
 23 Jack Archer
 24 Lion of St. Mark
 25 Lion of the North
 26 Lost Heir, The
 27 Maori and Settler
 28 One of the 28th
 29 Orange and Green
 30 Out on the Pampas
 31 Queen's Cup, The
 32 Rujub, the Juggler
 33 St. George for England
 34 Sturdy and Strong
 35 Through the Fray
 36 True to the Old Flag
 37 Under Drake's Flag
 38 With Clive in India
 39 With Lee in Virginia
 40 With Wolfe in Canada
 41 Young Buglers, The
 42 Young Carthaginians
 43 Young Colonists, The
 44 Young Franc-Tireurs
 45 Young Midshipman

All of above titles can be procured at the store where this book was
bought, or sent to any address for 75c, postage paid, by the publishers




ALWAYS _ASK FOR THE_ DONOHUE

COMPLETE EDITIONS--THE BEST FOR LEAST MONEY


WOODCRAFT _for_ Boy Scouts and Others

_By_ OWEN JONES _and_ MARCUS WOODMAN _With a Message to Boy Scouts by_
SIR BADEN-POWELL, _Founder of the Boy Scouts' Movement_.

One of the essential requirements of the Boy Scout training is a
KNOWLEDGE OF WOODCRAFT. This necessitates a book embracing all the
subjects and treating on all the topics that a thorough knowledge of
WOODCRAFT implies.

This book thoroughly exhausts the subject. It imparts a comprehensive
knowledge of woods from fungus growth to the most stately monarch of the
forest; it treats of the habits and lairs of all the feathered and furry
inhabitants of the woods. Shows how to trail wild animals; how to
identify birds and beasts by their tracks, calls, etc. Tells how to
forecast the weather, and in fact; treats on every phase of nature with
which a Boy Scout or any woodman or lover of nature should be familiar.
The authorship guarantees it's authenticity and reliability.
Indispensable to "Boy Scouts" and others. Printed from large clear type
on superior paper.

Embellished With Over 100 Thumb Nail Illustrations Taken From Life

Bound in Cloth. Stamped with unique and appropriate designs in ink!

Price, 75c Postpaid

M. A. DONOHUE & CO.
701-727 S. DEARBORN ST.  CHICAGO

Title: Wireless Telegraph Construction For Amateurs

Creator: Alfred Powell Morgan

Release date: December 30, 2020 [eBook #64174]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by James Simmons


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WIRELESS TELEGRAPH CONSTRUCTION FOR AMATEURS ***




Produced by James Simmons.

This file was produced from page images at the Internet Archive.




Transcribers Note


This book was transcribed from scans of the original found at the
Internet Archive. Tables are represented as images. The index of the
original book has been removed, but the catalog of books from the
publisher has been included. There was no book cover image in the scans
so I created one.




[Illustration: _Frontispiece._ *Plate I. Electrical Conventions.*]




                           WIRELESS TELEGRAPH

                            CONSTRUCTION FOR

                                AMATEURS

                                   BY

                          ALFRED POWELL MORGAN


  EDITOR MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL DEPARTMENT OF THE "BOYS MAGAZINE"

             AUTHOR OF "WIRELESS TELEGRAPHY AND TELEPHONY"


                        _WITH 167 ILLUSTRATIONS_


                 *Third Edition, Revised and Enlarged*


                   WITH A COMPLETE DESCRIPTION OF THE

                            NEW WIRELESS LAW




                               NEW YORK:

                        D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY

                             25 PARK PLACE

                                  1914




                       Copyright, 1910, 1913, by

                        D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY




                            _Stanhope Press_

                          F. H. GILSON COMPANY

                             BOSTON. U.S.A.




PREFACE.


In this work, the author has endeavored to present a book embracing
practical information for those who may wish to build for private or
experimental use a set of wireless instruments which are more than toys
but yet not so expensive as the commercial apparatus.

Many books have been published on the subject of wireless telegraphy,
but in them the interests of the novice have been rather neglected and
in order to build an outfit he has been forced to rely upon a series of
disconnected articles published in the amateur periodicals.

It is the object of this book to show the construction of simple,
efficient instruments by means of clear drawings, and to give enough
elementary theory and practical hints to enable the experimenter to
build a size and type in keeping with his needs and resources.

The tiresome "how to make" style has been avoided as far as possible.
History and all unimportant details are omitted to give in their place a
concise explanation of the parts played by the different instruments and
the influence of developing their various factors.

A small lathe and a set of taps and dies are necessary to produce
apparatus having a good appearance, but a little ingenuity displayed in
adapting screws and parts of old electrical instruments oftentimes at
hand will make these tools unnecessary.

Ordinary precaution and plenty of time should be used in the work. It is
obvious that if a large coil is to be made, it is well to insure its
successful completion by painstaking care and the use of proper
materials. Neither is it wise to strain an instrument through becoming
impatient and using it before it is properly completed and adjusted.

Wherever possible instructions have been given regarding the adjustment
of the apparatus, but it is only by actual practice that the operator
will acquaint himself with the most efficient manipulation.

Extracts from articles contributed by the Author to _Popular
Electricity_ have been used in the chapters on Spark Gaps, Oscillation
Detectors and Telephone Receivers, through the courtesy of the editor,
Mr. H. W. Young.

In conclusion, the writer wishes to express his thanks to the United
Wireless Telegraph Company for views of their apparatus and to the other
firms who have loaned electrotypes and supplied information. To those
who have assisted in the preparation of the book, more especially to Mr.
Safford Adams, for numerous suggestions and criticisms, the Author
desires to express his full acknowledgments.


ALFRED POWELL MORGAN.

UPPER MONTCLAIR, N.J.

_June_, 1910.




PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION.


The success of the previous editions of this book has made a new and
third one necessary.

There have not been any startling changes or new discoveries made in the
field of wireless telegraphy since the first edition was published, but
the art has undergone a number of small changes and improvements which
have increased the efficiency and selectivity of the apparatus.

Since then a federal law restricting and controlling wireless telegraphy
has been passed. Its effect has been to place wireless telegraphy upon a
more certain basis, and to give a recognized standing to the amateur
experimenter.

This new law has been included in this edition in the form of an
appendix. The amateur will do well to read it carefully. Compliance with
its regulations will prove beneficial rather than a hindrance.

A fully illustrated chapter explaining exactly how to comply with the
law and how to build the apparatus required has been added. Complete
descriptions of several new types of detectors are also included.

All old matter has been thoroughly revised and several illustrations
replaced by ones more up-to-date and of direct interest.


ALFRED P. MORGAN.

UPPER MONTCLAIR, N.J.

_May_, 1913.




    PREFACE. ..........................................................
    PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION. .....................................
    CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY. ..........................................
      The Transmission and Reception of Electric Waves. ...............
    CHAPTER II. THE APPARATUS. ........................................
    CHAPTER III. AERIALS AND EARTH CONNECTIONS. .......................
    CHAPTER IV. INDUCTION COILS. ......................................
    CHAPTER V. INTERRUPTERS. ..........................................
    CHAPTER VI. TRANSFORMERS. .........................................
      Construction of a 2-K.W. Transformer. ...........................
    CHAPTER VII. OSCILLATION CONDENSERS AND LEYDEN JARS. ..............
    CHAPTER VIII. SPARK GAPS OR OSCILLATORS. ..........................
    CHAPTER IX. TRANSMITTING HELIXES. .................................
    CHAPTER X. KEYS. ..................................................
    CHAPTER XI. AERIAL SWITCHES AND ANCHOR GAPS. ......................
    CHAPTER XII. HOT WIRE AMMETER. ....................................
    CHAPTER XIII. OSCILLATION DETECTORS. ..............................
      "UNIVERSAL" DETECTOR. ...........................................
      ELECTROLYTIC DETECTORS. .........................................
      TANTALUM DETECTOR. ..............................................
      CRYSTAL DETECTORS. ..............................................
      LEAD PEROXIDE DETECTOR. .........................................
      THE MARCONI MAGNETIC DETECTOR. ..................................
    CHAPTER XIV. TUNING COILS AND TRANSFORMERS. .......................
    CHAPTER XV. RECEIVING CONDENSERS. .................................
    CHAPTER XVI. TELEPHONE RECEIVERS AND HEADBANDS. ...................
    CHAPTER XVII. OPERATION. ..........................................
      ELECTRICAL TERMS AND DEFINITIONS. ...............................
    CHAPTER XVIII. THE AMATEUR AND THE WIRELESS LAW. WHAT IT IS; HOW TO
    COMPLY; HOW TO SECURE A LICENSE. ..................................
      APPARATUS REQUIRED IN MANY INSTANCES IN ORDER TO COMPLY WITH THE
      WIRELESS LAW. ...................................................
      Receiving Apparatus. ............................................




    _Frontispiece._ *Plate I. Electrical Conventions.* ................
    Fig 1. Hertz Oscillator and Resonator. ............................
    Fig. 2. Hydraulic Oscillator. .....................................
    Fig. 3. "Hydraulic" Transmitter and Receptor. .....................
    Fig. 4. Simple Wireless Telegraph Transmitter and Receptor. .......
    Fig. 5. Electric Waves and Lines of Strain. .......................
    Fig. 6. Resonance Tube. ...........................................
    Fig. 7. Lag and Lead. .............................................
    Fig. 8. Tuned Hydraulic Transmitter and Receptor. .................
    Fig. 9. Tuned Wireless Telegraph Transmitter and Receptor .........
    Fig. 10. Long-distance Receiving Set. .............................
    Fig. 11. Murdock Receiving Set. ...................................
    Fig. 12. Clapp-Eastham Receiving Set. .............................
    Fig. 13. Prague Receiving Set. ....................................
    Fig. 14. Receiving Set. ...........................................
    Fig. 15. Receiving Set. ...........................................
    Fig. 16. Murdock Transmitting and Receiving Set. ..................
    Fig. 17. United Wireless Portable Outfit. .........................
    *Plate II. Aerial Systems.* .......................................
    Fig. 18. Electrose Insulators. ....................................
    Fig. 19. Guy Insulator. ...........................................
    Fig. 20. Insulating Tube. .........................................
    Fig. 21. High-tension Cable and Insulator. ........................
    Fig. 22. Flat-top T Aerial. .......................................
    Fig. 23. Ground Clamp. ............................................
    Fig. 24. Switch for Lightning Protection. .........................
    Fig. 25. Diagram of an Induction Coil. ............................
    Fig. 26. Induction Coil Core. .....................................
    Fig. 27. Theoretical and practical form of secondary. .............
    Fig. 28. Layer Winding for Small Coils. ...........................
    Fig. 29. Section Winder. ..........................................
    Fig. 30. Impregnator for Silk Covered Wire. .......................
    Fig. 31. Methods of Connecting the Secondary Sections. ............
    Fig. 32. Coil Case. ...............................................
    Fig. 33. Simple Interrupter. ......................................
    Fig. 34. Independent Interrupter. .................................
    Fig. 35. Details of Magnets. ......................................
    Fig. 36. Details of Moving Parts. .................................
    Fig. 37. Details of Standard and Screws. ..........................
    Fig. 38. Diagram of Connections for an Independent Interrupter. ...
    Fig. 39. Construction of a Paper Condenser. .......................
    Fig. 40. Wenhelt and Simon Electrolytic Interrupters. .............
    Fig. 41. Construction of Electrolytic Interrupters. ...............
    Fig. 42. Details of Electrolytic Interrupters. ....................
    Fig. 43. Electrolytic Interrupter. ................................
    Fig. 44. Assembly and Dimensions of Core. .........................
    Fig. 45. Fiber Head and Separator. ................................
    Fig. 46. Section Form. ............................................
    Fig. 47. Methods of Connecting Sections. ..........................
    Fig. 48. Assembly of Leg. .........................................
    Fig. 49. Transformer with One Secondary removed. ..................
    Fig. 50. Wiring Diagram. ..........................................
    Fig. 51. Clapp-Eastham 1/4-K.W. Transformer. ......................
    Fig. 52. United Wireless Motor-Generator set for supplying
    Alternating Current to the Transformer. ...........................
    Fig. 53. Simple Condenser. ........................................
    Fig. 54. Leyden Jar. ..............................................
    Fig. 55. "Aerial Switch." .........................................
    Fig. 56. Amco Oscillation Condenser. ..............................
    Fig. 57. Clapp-Eastham Oscillation Condenser. .....................
    Fig. 58. Methods of Varying Capacity. .............................
    Fig. 59. Spark Gaps. ..............................................
    Fig. 60. Spark Gap. ...............................................
    Fig. 61. Closely Coupled Helix. ...................................
    *Plate III. Transmitting Circuits.* ...............................
    Fig. 62. Prague Transmitting Helix. ...............................
    Fig. 63. Closely Coupled Tuning Circuit. ..........................
    Fig. 64. Loosely Coupled Transmitting Helix and Contact Clip. .....
    Fig. 65. Loosely Coupled Transmitting Circuit. ....................
    Fig. 66. United Wireless Helix, Spark Gap and Condenser. ..........
    Fig. 67. Morse Key fitted with Extension Lever. ...................
    Fig. 68. Wireless Key. ............................................
    Fig. 69. "United Wireless Type Key." ..............................
    Fig. 70. Connections for Aerial Switch. ...........................
    Fig. 71. Aerial Switches. .........................................
    Fig. 72. Detail of Contacts. ......................................
    Fig. 73. Details of Switch Parts. .................................
    Fig. 74. Method of Fastening Knife. ...............................
    Fig. 75. "T" Aerial Switch. .......................................
    Fig. 76. "United" Wireless Lightning Switch. ......................
    Fig. 77. Shoemaker Tuning Coil and Aerial Switch. .................
    Fig. 78. "United" Wireless Anchor Gaps. ...........................
    Fig. 79. Anchor Gap. ..............................................
    Fig. 80. Simple Hot Wire Meter. ...................................
    Fig. 81. Meter with Case Removed. .................................
    Fig. 82. Glass Compensating Strip. ................................
    Fig. 83. Details of "Hot Wire" Supports. ..........................
    Fig. 84. Details of Movement. .....................................
    Fig. 85. Complete Movement. .......................................
    Fig. 86. Side View of Hot Wire and Movement. ......................
    Fig. 87. United Wireless Hot Wire Ammeter. ........................
    Fig. 88. Universal Detector. ......................................
    Fig. 89. Details of Universal Detector. ...........................
    Fig. 90. Parts of Universal Detector. .............................
    Fig. 91. Bare Point Electrolytic Detector. ........................
    Fig. 92. Effect of Exposing too much Wire. ........................
    Fig. 93. Electrolytic Detector Circuits. ..........................
    Fig. 94. Electrolytic Detector. ...................................
    Fig. 95. Forming "Glass" Point. ...................................
    Fig. 96. Shoemaker Detector. ......................................
    Fig. 97. Shoemaker Detector Circuits. .............................
    Fig. 98. Lamp Detector. ...........................................
    Fig. 99. Simple Electrolytic Detector. ............................
    Fig. 100. Electrolytic Detector. ..................................
    Fig. 101. Details of Electrolytic Detector. .......................
    Fig. 102. Increasing the Sensitiveness of an Electrolytic Detector.
    Fig. 103. Tantalum Detector. ......................................
    Fig. 104. United Wireless Carborundum Detector (horizontal type). .
    Fig. 105. United Wireless Carborundum Detector (vertical type). ...
    Fig. 106. Clapp-Eastham Ferron Detector. ..........................
    Fig. 107. Silicon Crystal in Cup. .................................
    Fig. 108. Silicon Detector Circuits. ..............................
    Fig. 109. Perikon Detector Elements. ..............................
    Fig. 110. Perikon Detector. .......................................
    Fig. 111. Peroxide of Lead Detector. ..............................
    Fig. 112. Marconi Magnetic Detector. ..............................
    Fig. 113. Details of Transformer. .................................
    Fig. 114. Method of Joining Ends of Band. .........................
    Fig. 115. Pulley. .................................................
    Fig. 116. Pulley Bearings. ........................................
    Fig. 117. Circuit of Magnetic Detector. ...........................
    Fig. 118. Fleming Oscillation Valve. ..............................
    Fig. 119. Flame Audion. ...........................................
    Fig. 120. Circuit of Flame Audion. ................................
    Fig. 121. Double-slide Tuning Coil. ...............................
    Fig. 122. Sliders. ................................................
    Fig. 123. Double-slide Tuning Coil Circuits. ......................
    *Plate IV. Receiving Circuits. (Straightaway Aerial.)* ............
    Fig. 124. Murdock Double-slide Tuning Coil. .......................
    Fig. 125. United Wireless Receiving Set. ..........................
    Fig. 126. United Wireless Portable Receiving Set. .................
    Fig. 127. Oscillation Transformer. ................................
    Fig. 128. United Wireless Receiving Transformer. ..................
    Fig. 129. Details of Receiving Transformer. .......................
    Fig. 130. Slider for Loose Coupler. ...............................
    Fig. 131. Loosely Coupled Tuning Circuits. ........................
    Fig. 132. Combination Loosely and Closely Coupled Tuner. ..........
    Fig. 133. Clapp-Eastham Loose Coupler. ............................
    Fig. 134. A Highly Efficient Form of Loose Coupler. ...............
    Fig. 135. Potentiometer. ..........................................
    Fig. 136. Amco Potentiometer. .....................................
    *Plate V. Receiving Circuits.* ....................................
    Fig. 137. Tuning Circuit with and without an Adjustable Condenser. .
    Fig. 138. Tubular Condenser. ......................................
    Fig. 139. Variable Condenser. .....................................
    Fig. 140. Details of Variable Condenser. ..........................
    Fig. 141. Sliding Plate Variable Condenser. .......................
    Fig. 142. Types of Permanent Magnets. .............................
    Fig. 143. Grinding Tool. ..........................................
    Fig. 144. Parts of a Holtzer Cabot Receiver. ......................
    Fig. 145. Holtzer Cabot Head Set. .................................
    Fig. 146. Adjustable Head Band. ...................................
    Fig. 147. Marconi Station at Siasconset, Mass. ....................
    *Plate VI. DeForest and Marconi Systems.* .........................
    Fig. 148. Experimental Amateur Station of W. Haddon, Brooklyn, N. Y.
    Fig. 149. Complete Receiving Outfit Consisting of Receiving
    Transformer, Detector, Fixed Condenser, Loading Coil, Two Variable
    Condensers, Potentiometer, Battery, Switches, etc. ................
    Fig. 150. Receiving Outfit Consisting of Receiving Transformer,
    Fixed Condenser and Detector. .....................................
    Fig. 151. Amco Oscillation Helix. .................................
    Fig. 152. Details of Oscillation Helix Construction. ..............
    Fig. 153. Quenched Gap. ...........................................
    Fig. 154. Quenched Gap. ...........................................
    Fig. 155. Details of Disk and Ring. ...............................
    Fig. 156. Explanatory Drawing of Quenched Gap. ....................
    Fig. 157. Amco Rotary Gap. ........................................
    Fig. 158. Details of Revolving Parts of Rotary Gap. ...............
    Fig. 159. Details of Rotary Gap. ..................................
    Fig. 160. Methods of Preventing "Kick Back." ......................
    Fig. 161. Variometer. .............................................
    Fig. 162. Silicon Detector. .......................................
    Fig. 163. Pyron Detector. .........................................
    Fig. 164. Galena Detector. ........................................
    Fig. 165. Audion. .................................................
    Fig. 166. Audion Circuit. .........................................
    Fig. 167. Rotary Variable Condenser. ..............................




CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY.


Being desirous of keeping this book as far as possible within the limits
prescribed by the title, it is not possible to go deeply into the theory
of the propagation of electric waves, but at the same time it is not
deemed advisable to plunge suddenly into the construction of wireless
apparatus without giving some explanation of the underlying principles.

If the reader desires information upon this subject he is referred to
Flemings "Electric Wave Telegraphy" or the same authors "Elementary
Manual of Radio-telegraphy and Radio-telephony."

The explanations given in this chapter do not involve any actual theory
of the transmission and reception of electric waves. They are merely
intended to show the train of actions which take place and may be
observed in a physical sense. With this purpose in view, several
references have been made to simple hydraulic apparatus and an analogy
drawn to render the explanation clearer.



The Transmission and Reception of Electric Waves.


Wireless telegraphy by means of electromagnetic waves may be divided
into four distinct operations, namely:

  1. The generation of electrical oscillations.
  2. The transformation of electrical oscillations into electrical
     waves.
  3. The transformation of electrical waves into electrical
     oscillations.
  4. The detection of the electrical oscillations.

The first two operations comprise those taking place at the transmitter,
while the last two, which are the converse of the first, are in evidence
only when receiving.

[Illustration: Fig 1. Hertz Oscillator and Resonator.]

Fig. 1 illustrates the original Hertz oscillator and resonator, which is
the simplest form a wireless installation may take. _T_ represents the
transmitting apparatus and _R_ the receptor. At the transmitting station
a telegraph key is placed in series with a battery and an induction
coil. Two large metal plates, _t_ and _t_, are connected to the
opposite sides of the spark gap, which in turn is connected to the
secondary of the induction coil. When the key is pressed the electrical
circuit is completed and the voltage of the battery is raised
sufficiently by the induction coil to charge the metal plates _t_ and
_t_.

The key serves to break the current into periods corresponding to the
dots and dashes of the telegraph code. When the high voltage of the
induction coil is impressed upon the plates they become charged, and
being of opposite polarity, when at a maximum the energy rushes across
the gap and produces a disruptive spark. Each discharge, although
appearing like a single spark passing in one direction, is in reality
made up of a large number of rapid oscillations or surgings. The first
passage of current serves to more than discharge the plates and they
become charged in the opposite direction. A reverse discharge then
occurs which also oversteps itself, and thus the oscillations go on, but
gradually become weaker and weaker until they die completely or are
damped out. The heated air of the spark gap becomes a conductor during
the passage of the spark, and the oscillations are enabled to surge back
and forth at the rate of 15,000 to 1,000,000 per second, although the
actual discharge may take only a fraction of a second.

[Illustration: Fig. 2. Hydraulic Oscillator.]

The generation of electrical oscillations may perhaps be made more clear
by reference to the hydraulic apparatus illustrated in Fig. 2. _T_ and
_T_ are communicating tubes divided by an elastic membrane M. The tubes
may be likened to the metal plates _t_ and _t_ or the arms of the
oscillator. The membrane may be likened to the layer of air between the
knobs which separates the opposite arms of the oscillator. _P_ is a pump
connected to the two tubes _T_ and _T_, and the broken lines in the
apparatus represent water. The pump corresponds to the induction coil in
Fig. 1, and the water to the secondary currents of the induction coil.
When the pump is set in operation, the water is drawn from the tube _T_
and injected into _T_. The pump valves prevent it from flowing back.
When the level becomes very high in _T_, the great pressure distends
the membrane in the direction shown by the dotted line until finally it
bursts and the water is allowed to flow with a rush into the tube T. But
the inertia of the water causes it to rise higher in the tube than its
final position of equilibrium, while in returning and endeavoring to
seek its level its inertia carries it below this position. Thus the
water oscillates back and forth until finally it comes to rest.

Similarly the difference of potential of the oscillator arms is not
immediately equalized upon the breaking down of the air gap, and the
apparatus becomes the seat of extremely rapid electrical oscillations,
as explained above.

All space is supposed to be filled with a highly attenuated, invisible
and weightless medium called ether. When the electrical oscillations
surge back and forth through the arms of the oscillator, portions of the
energy are thrown off from the apparatus and travel in enlarging circles
like the ripples on a pond. These consist of lines of dielectric stress
or electrostatic flux which pass through the ether and constitute
electromagnetic waves.

The receptor or resonator _R_, Fig. 1, consists of a circle of wire
having in it a small spark gap capable of minute adjustment. Two metal
plates _r_ and _r_ are sometimes attached to the opposite sides of the
spark gap. When the key is pressed at the transmitting station and waves
are sent out through the ether, they strike the resonator and set up
therein electrical oscillations which pass across the gap in the shape
of sparks.

[Illustration: Fig. 3. "Hydraulic" Transmitter and Receptor.]

To make the explanation clearer, let us consider Fig. 3 in which two
floats or blocks of wood are represented as resting on the surface of a
tank or pool of water. One float, _A_, is connected by a rope and pulley
so that by jerking the rope the float may be made to _oscillate_ and
cause little ripples or waves to pass outwards in a gradually enlarging
circle. When the waves reach the float, _B_, they cause it to rise and
fall with each wave or to oscillate and reproduce the movements of the
float, _A_. Likewise the oscillations set up by a wireless transmitter
are sent out into space to be caught and duplicated at the receiving
station. Of course this analogy to the propagation and reception of
electric waves is not the same as the true electrical actions, but is
merely a graphical, representation.

[Illustration: Fig. 4. Simple Wireless Telegraph Transmitter and
Receptor.]

The wireless telegraph outfit illustrated in Fig. 1 would not serve for
more than short distances of a few feet, and so a somewhat similar but
more efficient apparatus is employed in practice. Fig. 4 shows such a
system in its simplest form. In this case the secondary or high
potential leads of the induction coil are connected, one to an earth and
the other to an aerial or antenna composed of a number of bare copper
wires insulated and suspended from a mast.

All electrically charged bodies are surrounded by an electrostatic field
of force, the nature of which in theory is a state of strain.

The action of an induction coil connected as in Fig. 4 is to charge the
upper part of the aerial above the spark gap, say with negative
electricity and establish a field of force in its vicinity varying in
area from a few feet to several miles. When the charge reaches a certain
potential it is sufficient to puncture the layer of air in the gap and a
spark takes place, setting up electrical oscillations.

[Illustration: Fig. 5. Electric Waves and Lines of Strain.]

Previous to the rupture of the spark gap, _lines of electric strain or
force_ stretch from the aerial to the earth on all sides as in the
center of Fig. 5. A line of force may be defined as a curve drawn in the
electric field so that the direction of the curve is the same as that of
the electric intensity at that point.

The aerial and the earth act like the two metal plates in Fig. 1 or like
the opposite plates of a condenser. As soon as the air gap is punctured
it becomes conductive and the aerial charge rushes down into the earth.
With the discharge, the strain in the electrostatic field is released
and the aerial charge rushes down into the earth, but in so relaxing
produces a new current and builds up a strain around the antenna
opposite in direction to the first. This process repeats itself very
rapidly and electrical oscillations are thus set up in the antenna.
Every oscillation changes the direction of the magnetic flux or
dielectric strain and causes the imaginary lines which originally
stretched from the aerial to the earth to be displaced and the ends
terminating at the aerial to run down it and form semi-loops or inverted
"Us" standing with their ends on the earth in a circular ripple around
the aerial and moving away from it with the speed of light. In Fig. 5
three oscillations are supposed to have taken place. The shortest
distance between two adjacent points at which the electric strain is at
a maximum in the same direction and period of time is the _wave length_
emitted by the aerial. The separate standing groups of dielectric strain
moving away from the antenna are electromagnetic waves. In the figure,
the adjacent groups are separated by half a wave length. These waves are
emitted at right angles to the transmitting aerial, whence they pass
through the ether to the other station. When they reach the receiving
aerial they set up electrical oscillations therein which are _too weak
to be perceptible in the shape of sparks_ as in the original Hertz
oscillator and resonator because of the great distance separating the
stations, so they are made to flow through a _detector_, which in Fig. 4
is represented as being a crystal of a mineral called silicon. When the
high frequency currents strike the silicon, they set up a weak pulsating
direct current. This action is due to a peculiar rectifying property of
the mineral. The direct current flows through the telephone receiver and
produces an audible sound. If the aerial and ground were connected
directly to the terminals of the telephone receiver, without the
silicon, the oscillations would not pass because of the impeding or
choking action of the electro-magnets in the telephone receivers.

*Tuning.*It is sometimes desirable that messages should be made
selective or secretive. It is obvious that if there were several large
stations in the same neighborhood they could not all operate at the same
time unless some means of preventing the stations from receiving more
than one message at a time were possible. This is the object in view of
the so-called "tuning" of wireless telegraphy. It also accomplishes a
second purpose which is perhaps considered more important than the
first. The length of the aerial may be too great or too short for the
amount of energy and the length of the waves which it emits or receives.
When this is the case, the oscillations are quickly damped out and do
not generate very powerful waves or produce strong signals at the
receiving station and thus by properly adjusting the circuit all
undesirable messages may be cut out as well as the signaling range
greatly increased. Every electrical circuit has a definite period or
electrical length, determined by its inductance and capacity. A circuit
emits waves of only one length for given values of inductance and
capacity, and must also be of a certain length before it will respond to
waves sent out by another transmitter. The careful adjustment of a
circuit to emit or receive a given wave constitutes _tuning_.

[Illustration: Fig. 6. Resonance Tube.]

This may be made more clear by the comparison of an electrical circuit
with a column of air. Fig. 6 represents a cross section of a glass tube,
_T_, lying in a horizontal position and containing a cork, _C_, which
can be slid to various positions. By adjusting the cork we are able to
obtain various depths of air in the tube from its open end, _M_, to the
cork, _C_.

When a vibrating tuning fork, _F_, is held opposite the open mouth and
the cork slid back and forth it is found that the sound of the tuning
fork is greatly increased in volume at a certain position of the cork.
If the cork is then removed from this position the sound decreases in
intensity. When the cork is in such a position that the sound of the
fork is reenforced, we have secured resonance. When in this condition
and the prong of the vibrating fork is moving toward the open mouth of
the tube a "condensed" pulse of air travels down the tube and back
again, having been reflected at the cork and reaching _M_ just as the
prong of the fork begins its excursion away from the open mouth of the
tube. When the prong of the fork is moving away from _M_ a "rarefied"
pulse of air moves from _M_ to _C_ and back again by the time the prong
is ready to begin its next vibration. When the tube is not in resonance,
the successive condensations and rarefactions passing up and down the
air column interfere with one another and decrease instead of increase
the sound of the tuning fork.

If we substitute the sound waves emitted by the tuning fork for high
frequency oscillations and the air column for the electrical circuit we
may readily see that by adjusting its length, resonance can be produced.
If the length of the air column is measured it will be found that the
reenforcing of the sound of the fork reaches a maximum when the depth of
the air column is _one-fourth_ of the sound wave length given by the
fork. Likewise resonance is produced in wireless telegraphy when the
length of the circuit is _approximately one-fourth_ the length of the
waves. Vice versa, the wave emitted from an ordinary closed circuit
transmitter is _approximately four times_ the length of the aerial wire.
For example, an aerial 25 meters long will emit waves having a length in
the neighborhood of 100 meters.

As stated above, tuning is accomplished and resonance or syntony
established by varying the inductance and capacity of the circuit. The
capacity of a circuit may be defined as its relative ability to retain
an electrical charge, while inductance is the property of an electric
circuit by virtue of which lines of force are developed around it.

Capacity and inductance are opposite or reactive in their effects upon a
circuit. If the value of one is decreased the influence of the other in
increased. Fig. 7 and the following explanation will serve to illustrate
this.

[Illustration: Fig. 7. Lag and Lead.]

Alternating currents do not always keep step with the voltage impulses
of a circuit. If there is inductance in the circuit, the current will
lag behind the voltage, and if there is capacity, the impulses of the
current will lead. Fig. 7 _A_ illustrates the lag produced by inductance
and _B_ the lead produced by capacity. In _A_ the impulses of the
current, represented by the full line, occur a little _later_ than those
of the volts as represented by the dotted line. In _B_ the effect is
just the opposite and the current leads. These reactive effects of
inductance and capacity are very pronounced with the high frequency
currents of wireless telegraphy, and, as stated before, are the factors
which determine the period of the circuit.

[Illustration: Fig. 8. Tuned Hydraulic Transmitter and Receptor.]

Tuning is represented graphically in Fig. 8. The two floats _A_ and _B_
are not only resting on the surface of a pool of water as in Fig. 3 but
are also suspended from the springs _S_ and _S_. The springs will have,
like a pendulum, a definite time of rising and falling, or period of
oscillation, depending upon their length. If we strike the float _A_ the
spring will cause the float to rise and fall at a definite rate and send
out a little wave or ripple with every oscillation. If the springs _S_
and _S_ are of the same length, the float _B_ will be caused to
oscillate with every wave sent out by _A_, for, the periods of the
springs being equal, _B_ will be permitted to rise with a wave and fall
again just in time to be raised by the next oncoming ripple. On the
other hand, if the springs are of different lengths, _B_ may only rise
slightly and in falling meet an oncoming wave which will cause it to
rise before it has reached its lowest point and so dampen or weaken its
oscillations that they either do not become very strong or are entirely
obliterated. Thus several floats having different periods of oscillation
might be sending out ripples in the same pool, and the float _B_ could
be made to respond to any of them by adjusting the length of the spring.

We may also see in this illustration the part that tuning plays in
causing the apparatus to emit or receive more powerful impulses. When
the rope in the untuned apparatus illustrated in Fig. 3 is jerked, the
block _A_ oscillates only once or twice before a new jerk is required to
keep it in motion. In Fig. 8 it is quite the contrary, for when an
impulse has been given to the float _A_ it will oscillate much longer
than the untuned float before it requires to be set in motion again.
Likewise the float _B_ in Fig. 8 will oscillate longer and more
powerfully than the float _B_ in Fig. 3, when once it has been set in
motion.

[Illustration: Fig. 9. Tuned Wireless Telegraph Transmitter and
Receptor]

Fig. 9 shows a diagram of a simple wireless telegraph system employing
an inductance and capacity for tuning the circuits. When the induction
coil is in operation it charges a condenser. The condenser discharges
through the sending helix and across the spark gap. The sending helix is
merely a spiral coil of wire of large diameter, and constitutes the
greater part of the inductance in the circuit. Two movable contacts, _A_
and _B_, make connections with the helix. The spark gap, condenser and
lower portion of the helix up to the movable contact _A_ are known as
the closed circuit. By shifting _A_, more or less inductance may be
included in the closed circuit until resonance is secured. The aerial,
the inductance from the contact _B_ down, the condenser and the ground
compose the open circuit. By varying the contact _B_ more or less
inductance may be included in the open circuit and its period altered
until the oscillatory currents of both circuits flow in the same period
of time. The closed and open portions of the transmitting helix form an
auto transformer, and the voltages of the open circuit are raised above
those of the closed circuit.

The tuned receptor shown in Fig. 9 is the simplest form possible and is
known as the single slide system. The tuning coil or helix is much
longer in proportion to its diameter than the sending helix, and is made
of finer wire, since it does not carry such heavy currents. When the
contact is slid up or down on the tuning coil, the inductance of the
circuit is varied. Since the oscillating currents in the receiving
aerial have the same frequency as those in the radiating aerial, the
receptor must have the same relative values of inductance and capacity.
This condition is obtained by varying the slider until the signals in
the telephone receivers are the loudest.

In practice more than one sliding contact is used, and these together
with adjustable condensers make the circuit more complicated. These
devices are necessary because oscillations may be forced on a receptor
by a near-by transmitter unless other precautions than the "single
slider" are taken. Such circuits are illustrated in Plates IV and V.
With them it is possible to obtain a considerable degree of selectivity
and "tune out" an undesirable message.




CHAPTER II. THE APPARATUS.


It is generally the receiving apparatus which first attracts the
attention of the amateur operator, and so it will be considered first
here. An efficient receiving set consists of some form of _Detector,
Tuning Coil, Telephone Receivers_, and _Condenser_.

Other accessories such as adjustable condensers, potentiometer, battery
and testing buzzer improve the outfit and make it more complete.

The choice of the type of instruments must be left entirely to the
person who is constructing them. His resources will determine whether he
is to use 1,000 ohm telephone receivers built especially for wireless
work or ordinary ones having a resistance of only 75 ohms. It is
therefore best to read carefully the chapters devoted to the different
pieces of receiving apparatus and select the type of detector, tuning
coil, etc., which it is desirable to use before commencing the
construction of any.

For beginners, I would recommend an outfit consisting of a silicon
detector, a double slide tuning coil, a condenser of fixed capacity and
75-ohm telephone receivers. Such an outfit with a 50-foot aerial will
receive messages about 150 miles. If 1,000 ohm telephone receivers are
used, messages may be read up to 400 miles. Much depends upon the
location of the station and the ability of the operator.

A more elaborate and efficient set consists of an electrolytic or
"Perikon" detector, a transforming tuner, two adjustable condensers, a
potentiometer and a pair of 1,000 ohm telephone receivers. This outfit
and a 75-foot aerial could be made to receive 500 to 1,000 miles by a
careful operator.

Several cuts of wireless apparatus built for private installation are
shown both in this chapter and further through the book, to give an idea
of how the better instruments of this type are constructed and finished.

[Illustration: Fig. 10. Long-distance Receiving Set.]

Fig. 10 illustrates a selective receiving set built by the Long Distance
Wireless Company. The set is mounted on a mahogany base and the
instruments are finished in polished hard rubber and lacquered brass.
They comprise a detector stand so arranged that any of the sensitive
minerals used in wireless work may be used. The tuning coil is of the
double slide type. The condenser is sealed up in a square lacquered
brass tube fitted with hard rubber ends and binding posts. The
arrangement and construction of the outfit may be readily understood
from the cut.

[Illustration: Fig. 11. Murdock Receiving Set.]

Fig. 11 illustrates a receiving set manufactured by the Wm. J. Murdock
Company. The tuning coil is fitted with hard rubber composition ends and
is wound on a special core which is not affected by temperature changes.
The detector is of the crystal type and is of rather unique
construction, since the small fixed condenser is mounted in the base of
the detector itself.

The Clapp-Eastham set in Fig. 12 employs a receiving transformer which
makes great selectivity possible. The detector is mounted at the
left-hand side of the outfit. A very sensitive mineral called "Ferron"
is used in the detector. The fixed condenser is enclosed in a brass tube
fitted with hard rubber ends and is located on the front of the base,
directly in the center. A variable condenser of the rotary type is
placed at the right-hand corner.

[Illustration: Fig. 12. Clapp-Eastham Receiving Set.]

The Prague Electric Company manufacture the apparatus shown in Fig. 13.
The cabinet is mahogany and is fitted with a hard rubber cover. A fixed
condenser and a double slide tuning coil are mounted within the cabinet.
The sliders of the tuning coil project through two long slots in the
cabinet. A universal detector mounted on top of the cabinet is so
designed that any material may be experimented with or tested.

[Illustration: Fig. 13. Prague Receiving Set.]

Fig. 14 shows a receiving set built up from apparatus described in this
book. The cabinet is 12 x 16 inches and 4 inches deep. The wood should
be 1/2 inch thick, and in order to present a good appearance is
preferably of mahogany. As mahogany is sometimes very hard to procure
and expensive, some may find red birch an excellent substitute. When
stained with a mahogany stain it presents a fine appearance.

[Illustration: Fig. 14. Receiving Set.]

Varnishing and polishing are wasted time when applied to the average
amateurs instruments in view of the rough handling and scratching which
they receive. The best plan is to stain the wood with an oil stain and
give it a wax finish. An oil stain contains no varnish but is merely
coloring matter and oil. A good coat should be applied with a wide brush
and the surplus stain immediately wiped off by rubbing the whole surface
with a piece of cheesecloth. As soon as the stain is thoroughly dry the
wood is waxed.

Cut up some beeswax into fine shreds and place it in a jar. Pour some
turpentine over the beeswax and let the mixture stand for five or six
hours, giving it an occasional stir. Allow it to stand further if
necessary until the wax melts and then add enough turpentine to give the
mixture a consistency similar to that of thick cream. Apply the
preparation to the wood with a rag, and then rub with a piece of clean
cheesecloth until the finish is hard and dry. Waxing produces a gloss
which is not so bright as a French polish but yet is more durable and
not so easily scratched or marred.

A double slide tuning coil made as described in Chapter XIV is mounted
on top of the cabinet in the rear. A "universal" detector is mounted in
the center, directly in front of the tuning coil. A tubular condenser of
fixed capacity is placed on the left-hand side of the detector, and a
potentiometer on the opposite side. A double point switch placed
directly in front of the detector enables the potentiometer to be
brought into play when a battery is used. Four binding posts are mounted
on the front of the cabinet. The ground and aerial are connected to the
left-hand pair and the telephone receivers to those on the right hand.
The wiring diagram is shown also in Fig. 14. By placing the switch _A_
on contact 1, the potentiometer is brought into use. When on contact 2,
the potentiometer is cut out. The switch _B_ must be opened when the
detector is not in use so as not to run down the battery.

[Illustration: Fig. 15. Receiving Set.]

Fig. 15 shows a receiving set somewhat similar to that shown in Fig. 14
but more elaborate and efficient. The cabinet in this case measures 14 x
22 inches and is 6 inches deep. A loosely coupled or transforming tuning
coil is used in place of the closely coupled double slide type. Two
variable condensers are mounted on either side of the tuning coil. The
detector and potentiometer occupy the space directly in front of the
tuning coil, while a fixed condenser is placed at their right. The two
switches for breaking the battery circuit and disconnecting the
potentiometer are in front of the detector. The aerial, ground and
telephone receiver leads are connected to binding posts mounted on the
front of the cabinet.

The batteries, in both cases, are placed inside the cabinet. The details
and construction of all the separate instruments will be found in the
respective chapters as denoted by the titles.

*Transmitting Range.*A simple transmitting outfit capable of sending
about two miles consists of the necessary batteries, a one-inch spark
induction coil, a small zinc spark gap and a key. The connections of
such a transmitting outfit are shown in Fig. 4.

If the same coil is used with a transmitting helix and a condenser, the
range may be increased from 3 to 5 miles.

A 1 1/2-inch spark induction coil using a condenser and a transmitting
helix will send about 10 miles, and a 3-inch coil under the same
conditions about 20 miles. A 4 and a 6 inch coil will transmit about 30
and 40 miles respectively.

[Illustration: Fig. 16. Murdock Transmitting and Receiving Set.]

The one quarter kilowatt transformer with a helix and four two-quart
leyden jars or an equivalent condenser will transmit at least 50 miles
with a suitable aerial. Used as a one half kilowatt transformer with a
helix and eight two-quart leyden jars, it will send about 100 miles.

Of course, as in the case of the receiving outfits, these distances are
approximate and depend upon the location of the station, the nature of
the ground over which the messages are transmitted, the kind of receptor
used at the receiving station and the efficiency of the operator
himself.

Fig. 16 illustrates a complete Murdock transmitting and receiving set.
The transmitting outfit consists of a 15-watt induction coil giving
about a one-inch spark, a sending helix, oscillation condenser, a key
and a double pole double throw switch for changing the antenna and
ground from the transmitting to the receiving instruments or vice versa.
The spark gap is mounted on top of the coil. The receiving outfit is the
same as that illustrated in Fig. 11.

*A complete wireless station*outside of the aerial consists primarily
of a source of electrical energy, a transformer or induction coil for
charging the oscillation condenser, an oscillation condenser, a
transmitting helix, a key for breaking the primary current, a spark gap,
an aerial switch, a hot wire ammeter for tuning the transmitting
circuits, a detector, a receiving tuner, auxiliary tuning apparatus such
as fixed and variable condensers, a potentiometer and battery, and a
pair of telephone receivers with a headband.

Other apparatus such as switches, insulators, anchor gaps, testing
buzzers, reactance coils, grounding switches, etc., have been described
in various places throughout the book and their use suggested whenever
it is of any advantage.

The choice of transmitting instruments, as with the receiving apparatus,
is left entirely with the experimenter so that he may suit his ideas and
means. Wherever possible the range and power of the instruments have
been given and suggestions made as to the other apparatus which should
be used in connection with them so that the completed outfit will bear
some sense of proportion.

[Illustration: Fig. 17. United Wireless Portable Outfit.]

Fig. 17 illustrates the portable wireless telegraph set manufactured by
the United Wireless Telegraph Company for army service and exploring
expeditions or isolated camps. The aerial and the mast can be unloaded,
erected, and all parts be ready for operation in fifteen minutes. The
mast is made of interchangeable wooden sections. The current for the
transmitter is furnished by a portable storage battery. The whole outfit
is capable of furnishing efficient service for distances of 25 to 30
miles.




CHAPTER III. AERIALS AND EARTH CONNECTIONS.


The aerial or antenna ordinarily consists of a number of wires elevated
in the air to emit or intercept the Hertzian waves. In fitting up a
wireless station the location and erection of an aerial are of prime
importance, and the successful reception and transmission of wireless
messages will depend largely upon its condition.

A few years ago the wireless antenna consisted of a metal plate high in
the air and having a wire suspended from it, but to-day usually exists
in one of the forms illustrated in Plate II.

The higher an aerial is placed above the surface of the earth, the wider
will be its electrostatic field, and consequently more powerful
electrical waves will be developed. But after a height of 180-200 feet
is attained, the engineering difficulties and the expenses increase so
rapidly that few stations exceed it. Other things being equal, the
increased range in transmitting varies as the square of the height of
the radiating wires. For example, a 25-foot aerial capable of
transmitting one mile theoretically will send waves 16 miles if made 100
feet high. The actual ratio is often greater, but much is dependent upon
the many meteorological conditions.

After the limit in a vertical direction has been reached, the only
remaining possibilities are to increase the surface and spread out
horizontally.

The flat top aerials are used on shipboard or wherever it is an
advantage to suspend the wires between two masts.

They are especially recommended for amateur use, since they need not be
so high as the other aerials, to be efficient. The flat top aerials are
_directive_, that is, they receive or radiate waves better in certain
directions. The bent or inverted L type is one of these and exhibits a
preference for waves coming from a direction opposite to that in which
its free end points. This directive action of an inverted L antenna may
be somewhat lessened if the leads are taken off at the center and it is
made a T aerial. This is the most common form of flat top aerial in use
on ships.

The inverted U type is not used extensively because the two opposite
leads or rat-tails make a centrally located operating room necessary.
The loop aerial is used by the United Wireless Company, in both their
ship and land stations. This type of aerial is well adapted to long
waves and close tuning.

The Lodge-Muirhead capacity aerial does not make use of a ground and is
rarely seen in this country. Lately the United States Signal Corps have
applied it to their balloons where an earth connection would be
impossible. The upper part of the balloon is covered with a network of
wires which serves as the upper aerial, and a second system of wires is
suspended below the balloon to take the place of the ground. By this
means they have had little difficulty in establishing successful
communication between the balloons and the earth.

The pyramid aerial is the type used by Marconi in long-distance
ultra-powerful stations, but is debarred from extensive installation on
account of the large cost of erection.

The cage and grid aerials are of the vertical type and are excellent
where a high support to elevate them can be secured. They are at present
used principally by the Massie and Stone Companies.

[Illustration: *Plate II. Aerial Systems.*]

The desirable feature of an aerial is a quantity known as its
electrostatic capacity and is measured by the charge required to raise
its potential one unit. An increase in capacity enables more energy to
be accumulated in the antenna, and consequently greater radiation
results. The capacity of an aerial may be increased by adding wires, but
must not be carried too far or the transmitting apparatus will not be
able to raise its potential sufficiently. Owing to an effect caused by
mutual induction between the wires, the lines of strain are not
distributed symmetrically, and the capacity will not vary directly but
rather approximately as the square root of the number of wires. In order
to decrease this action and use the surface most efficiently, the wires
should not be placed nearer than one-fiftieth of their length and
preferably farther apart.

The materials used for the insulation and suspension of an aerial must
be reliable, so that in event of bad weather the station will not lose
energy or be put out of working order because the aerial blew down.

Porcelain cleats or a string of porcelain insulating knobs make
inexpensive insulators. The standard insulator for wireless telegraph
work is the "Electrose" insulator. These are made of a molded
composition, and have iron rings set firmly in the ends so that they can
withstand a very heavy strain. Hard rubber is undesirable for an aerial
insulator because it becomes carbonized and covered with a conducting
layer.

[Illustration: Fig. 18. Electrose Insulators.]

High frequency currents permeate copper wire only about one
three-hundredth of an inch, and so, in order to increase the surface and
decrease the resistance, it is best to make the aerial of stranded wire.
A phosphor bronze wire for this purpose which is very flexible but still
does not sag or stretch, is composed of 7 strands of No. 20 B. S. gauge.
Such a wire 150 feet long suspended vertically and insulated from the
earth will have a capacity of from 0.0003 to 0.0004 of a microfarad.

The aerial must receive very particular attention if the station is one
kilowatt or over in power. In that case stranded wire is necessary. The
insulation of the aerial must be as thorough as possible, and proximity
to large conductors such as smokestacks, telephone lines, etc., avoided.
Rope stays and guys are advisable in order to prevent dissipation of
energy. If wire stays must be used they should be divided up at frequent
intervals by insulators.

Fig. 19 illustrates a guy insulator used by the United Wireless
Telegraph Company. It is made of two strips of well paraffined wood
separated by two porcelain knob insulators.

[Illustration: Fig. 19. Guy Insulator.]

Copper wire is the most desirable for an aerial. Iron wire must never be
used unless it is very heavily galvanized, and even then it is not to be
recommended. Aluminum wire is undesirable except for kite sustained
aerials. When used on an aerial and exposed to smoke and other fumes it
becomes quickly coated with a layer of oxide. All connections made in
aluminum wire must be soldered. This necessity may be better understood
when it is explained that electro-magnets on dynamos, etc., are
sometimes wound with bare aluminum wire and that the natural coating of
oxide on the wire is sufficient insulation to separate the turns.

[Illustration: Fig. 20. Insulating Tube.]

Where the aerial enters the building in which the instruments are
located it must be very carefully insulated. The simplest method is to
bore a hole through the wall and push a porcelain tube through it. The
rat-tail or leading-in wire is then passed through and the interstices
between it and the tube poured full of melted paraffin.

The best method is to bore a hole in the window pane and pass the wire
through a hard rubber insulating tube. Fig. 20 shows such a tube. It is
three-quarters of an inch in outside diameter and has an internal bore
of three-eighths of an inch. The tube is threaded throughout its entire
length. Two hard rubber flanges inch thick and 2 inches in diameter are
threaded to screw on the tube. The tube is inserted in the hole in the
window pane and the flanges screwed on either side. If a soft rubber
washer is placed between the hard rubber flanges and the pane there will
be less likelihood of cracking the glass. The leading-in wire is then
passed through the tube. The hole in the window pane may be bored by
using a copper tube having an external diameter equal to that of the
required hole. The tube is set in a brace and used like an ordinary bit,
but must be kept well smeared with emery and oil or else it will not
cut.

This method of leading in the rat-tail is the only one to be recommended
if the transmitter is one-quarter kilowatt or over in power.

[Illustration: Fig. 21. High-tension Cable and Insulator.]

The lead-in should be anchored just outside of the window so as to
relieve the glass pane and the tube from all strain. Pirelli cable or
the high-tension cable which is used for the secondary wiring of an
automobile is the best conductor to use for the aerial in the interior
of a building. The way to lead it over the ceiling is to support it on a
porcelain cleat similar to that shown in Fig. 21.

Many are under the erroneous impression that four times the length of
the aerial is the wave length which the station will emit. This is only
at the best a very rough approximation, for many undeterminable factors
such as the nature and location of surrounding objects, trees, etc., so
affect the capacity and inductance of the aerial that the wave length
must be determined empirically after the aerial is in operation.

The standard wave length of the United States Navy for ship
installations is 425 meters. An inverted L aerial, calculated before
erection to have a wave length as near as possible to this, has the
following dimensions: Four horizontal stranded phosphor bronze wires (7
strands No. 20 B. S.) each 160 feet long and spaced 5 feet apart, four
vertical wires 85 feet long and a 35-foot rat-tail.

It is always desirable that the wave length should be as long as
possible, for the waves will then travel farther and are not absorbed to
such an extent by trees, etc. The absorption due to trees is said to
vary as the fourth power of the frequency.

It is sometimes very convenient to calculate the strain on insulators or
masts caused by a horizontal antenna. This is easily found by the
following equation:

_P_ equals L x W/8S

where _P_ is the required strain in lbs., _W_ the weight in lbs. per
foot of aerial, _L_ the length of the aerial and _S_ the sag of the wire
in feet.

When erecting an aerial, it is best to fasten a pulley at the top of the
supporting mast and hoist the aerial up after the pole is in position.
Then in case the wires become twisted or broken they may be lowered and
repaired without any difficulty.

*Erection of an Aerial.*The average amateur aerial is generally from 40
to 60 feet high and supported at one end by a short pole placed on the
house and at the other end by a mast set in the ground or lashed to a
tree. Fig. 22 illustrates such an arrangement whereby a flat-top T
aerial is supported at one end by a short pole fastened to the house and
at the other end by a pole set in the ground.

[Illustration: Fig. 22. Flat-top T Aerial.]

The flat-top loop aerial is preferred by some amateurs and it is to be
recommended for receiving but is an inefficient radiator. When this type
of aerial is used the two leading-in wires should be connected to a
switch so that when the switch is closed they are connected. The aerial
may then be used as a straight-away aerial for transmitting, and by
opening the switch, as a loop aerial for receiving. This precaution is
advised when a loop aerial is to be used with a low-powered induction
coil as a transmitter, for otherwise there will be a loss of energy at
the anchor gap.

A large aerial is of no advantage when used with a small transformer or
induction coil because it cannot become properly charged.

To erect a flat-top T aerial, first select its location. If possible
take advantage of two trees and lash a short pole in the top of each, so
that the aerial may be raised up clear of the leaves. Another good plan
is to erect a pole at each end of the house. In any case, the distance
separating the poles must not be greater than three times the height
above ground or the directive action of the aerial will be very
pronounced. An aerial 50 to 60 feet high should have a length of from 80
to 100 feet. Stranded wire is no advantage for receiving, but must be
used if the transmitter is other than a small induction coil.

Secure two spruce sticks about 2 inches in diameter and 10 feet long.
Fasten an insulator 6 inches from each end of the spars and two more
each 3 J feet from the ends. This arrangement will separate each of the
four wires which compose the aerial by three feet.

The two spars are then laid on the ground at a distance apart equal to
the desired length of the aerial. Four wires, either stranded or No. 12
B. S. gauge copper, are cut to equal lengths and fastened to the
corresponding insulators. The middle of each wire is found and a long
copper wire soldered to it. These four wires constitute the rat-tail or
lead-in. They should be of the same length, and are not connected
together until they are about to enter the building. A short rope tied
to each end of the spars and fastened to the rope which passes over the
pulley on the top of the pole, serves as a bridle to prevent the aerial
from twisting. The aerial is then hoisted up but allowed to hang
slightly slack.

There is considerable difference of opinion among experts as to whether
or not the ends of the horizontal wires should be connected, and it is
impossible to say with good reason which method is better. However, when
erecting a flat top aerial, exercise every care to make all the wires of
exactly the same length.

An aerial of the size and type just described will send and receive the
following distances.

These distances are only approximate and will vary with the efficiency
of the operator and the location of the station.

When any of the transformers described later are used, the aerial should
be 80 to 100 feet high. In this case the last named receiving outfit
will have a range of from 500 to 1,000 miles.

*Ground Connections.*The importance of a good earth or ground
connection can hardly be overestimated. Whenever possible commercial
stations are located on moist ground or near a body of water so that a
good ground may be secured by imbedding zinc or copper plates in the
earth or water. A ground on shipboard is easily secured by fastening a
conductor to one of the ships plates.

If the ground connection is poor, the natural period of the oscillation
circuit is made irregular and short, so that the currents are choked in
passing in and out of the earth. The result is an undesirable rise of
potential at the lower end of the aerial and often harmful sparking at
the ground connection. The transmitting and receiving ranges of a
station are very considerably reduced through a poor earth.

Ground connection can often be obtained in the country by immersing
metal plates in a well or a cistern. Where connection is made to a water
supply pipe some sort of a ground clamp should be used to insure a good
contact.

[Illustration: Fig. 23. Ground Clamp.]

An efficient earth for portable outfits may be quickly formed by
spreading a large area of wire netting over the ground.

Proper precautions for protection against lightning by grounding the
aerial outside of the building should be taken.

The wisest plan is to install a heavy single pole double throw switch
outside of the building where the rat-tail enters. The knife of the
switch should be connected to the aerial, one contact to the house lead
and the other to a heavy wire grounded on the outside of the building as
in Fig. 24. When the apparatus is not in use the aerial should be
grounded by throwing the switch on the grounded contact.

[Illustration: Fig. 24. Switch for Lightning Protection.]

The rulings of the National Board of Fire Underwriters governing this
class of work are appended below.

"1. Aerial conductors to be permanently and effectively grounded at all
times when the station is not in operation by a conductor not smaller
than No. 4 B. S. gauge copper wire, run in a direct line as possible to
water pipe on street side of said water pipe within the premises or to
some other equally satisfactory earth connection.

"2. Aerial conductors when grounded as above specified must be
effectually cut off from all apparatus within the building.

"3. Or the aerial to be permanently connected at all times to earth in
the manner specified above, through a short gap lightning arrester; said
arrester to have a gap of not over .015 of an inch between brass or
copper plates not less than 2 1/2 inches in length, parallel to the gap,
and 1 1/2 inches the other way, with a thickness of not less than
one-eighth of an inch, mounted on non-combustible, non-absorptive
insulating material of such dimensions as to give ample strength. Other
approved arresters of equally low resistance and equally substantial
construction may be used.

"4. In cases where the aerial is grounded as specified in paragraph 1,
the switch employed to join the aerial to the ground connection shall
not be smaller than a standard 100-ampere jack-knife switch.

"Notice of wiring done for these installations should be sent to the
Board, the same as for all other work."




CHAPTER IV. INDUCTION COILS.


Some means of charging the condenser which produces the oscillatory
discharge is necessary. An induction coil is the most practical for the
amateur.

The induction coil consists of a primary coil of wire wound around a
central iron core and surrounded by a secondary coil consisting of many
thousand turns of carefully insulated wire. The primary coil is
connected to a source of direct current which also includes an
interrupter to "make" and "break" the current in rapid succession. Every
"make" of the circuit and consequent magnetization of the core induces a
momentary inverse current in the secondary, and every "break" and
corresponding demagnetization a momentary direct current. Normally, the
induced currents would be equal, but by means of a condenser shunted
across the interrupter the circuit when "made" requires considerable
time for the current and magnetization of the core to reach a maximum
value, while when broken the demagnetization and current drop are nearly
instantaneous. The value of the induced electromotive force in a circuit
varies as the speed at which the magnetic lines of force cut the
circuit, and so the induced e.m.f. at "break" is thus rendered high
enough to leap across a gap in the shape of sparks.

The formulas connected with induction coils depend upon conditions which
are never met in actual practice and cannot be relied upon. To construct
a coil of a given size, it is necessary to use dimensions obtained
empirically. Therefore it is well for the amateur to stick closely to
lines and hints which are given here or which appear in some _up to
date_ book on induction coil building.

[Illustration: Fig. 25. Diagram of an Induction Coil.]

For a long time the induction coil was an expensive, inefficient
instrument, until wireless telegraphy demanded of it more rigid and
efficient design and construction. It was the aim of manufacturers to
produce the longest possible spark length with a minimum amount of
secondary wire. As a result of this demand, wireless coils are now made
with a core of large diameter and give heavier and thicker sparks. The
secondary in this case is short and uses wire of large cross section in
order to reduce the resistance and minimize the heating.

No one part of an induction coil may be developed to its maximum
efficiency without seriously influencing and lowering the efficiency of
the other parts. The following suggestions regarding the construction
are given that they may prove a useful guide to the amateur coil
builder. The parts will be considered in their natural order of
construction.

*Core.*Some experimenters not quite familiar with the principles of
magnetism reason that if an induction coil were provided with a closed
core as the transformer, the efficiency of the coil would be materially
increased. But this is not so, for the magnetization and demagnetization
of the iron cannot take place rapidly enough in a closed core when an
interrupted direct current is employed in place of an alternating
current.

The core of an induction coil is therefore always straight. For the same
reason, it is never solid but is made up of a bundle of soft iron wires
in order that rapid changes in magnetism may take place. The wires are
always of as high a permeability as possible so as to create a strong
magnetic field. Swedish or Russian iron of a good quality is the best,
as its hysteresis losses are small. The smaller the diameter of the
wire the less will be the eddy current losses and heating, but the
permeability is also rendered less and the core will not be so
effective, as the amount of iron is thereby decreased and the oxidized
surface increased. No. 22 B. S. gauge wire is the best size for the
average core.

Wires of a good quality may be purchased already cut to various lengths.
To buy them in this form will save a great deal of the labor required in
building a core. If the wires are not quite straight they may be
straightened by rolling them, one at a time, between two boards. It is
best to reanneal the wires in the following manner. Place them in an
iron pipe and plug the ends of the pipe with clay. Then lay it in a coal
fire until the whole mass attains a red heat. The fire is then allowed
to die out gradually with the pipe and wires remaining in the ashes
until cool. When cool remove them from the pipe and rub each one with
emery paper until bright. After this cleaning, the wires are dipped in
hot water and dried. They are then dipped in a good quality of varnish
and allowed to dry again.

[Illustration: Fig. 26. Induction Coil Core.]

The varnish serves to interpose resistance to the eddy currents
generated in the core and renders the losses due to this cause much
less. A strong paper tube having an internal diameter equal to the
diameter of the finished core is made by rolling the paper on a form and
cementing with shellac. When perfectly dry. the tube is removed and the
wires tightly packed in it. The following table gives the core
dimensions for practical coils of different sizes.

*Primary Winding.*The ratio of the number of primary turns of an
induction coil to the number of secondary turns bears no relation to the
ratio of the primary and the secondary currents. It has been found in
practice that two layers of wire wound tightly on the core constitute
the best primary. The primary should always be thoroughly shellacked or
covered with insulating varnish. Since there is almost no ventilation in
the primary the wire must be large enough to avoid all heating. A table
containing the various sizes of primary wires is given below.

In large coils, the inductance of the primary causes a "kick back" and
sparks are liable to pass between the adjacent turns. For this reason,
it is always well to use double cotton covered wire and to further
thoroughly insulate it by soaking the primary and core in a pan of
melted paraffin and allowing them to harden therein. Afterwards the pan
is slightly warmed to loosen the cake of paraffin and the excess of wax
removed by scraping with a blunt instrument so as not to injure the
wires. Paraffin contracts upon hardening, and the proper method to
impregnate a porous substance is to allow it to soak and become set in
it upon cooling.

A good method of reducing the "kick back" and also the size of the
condenser shunted across the interrupter is to form the primary of a
number of turns of smaller wire in parallel, the effect being to give a
conductivity equal to a single wire of large diameter and at the same
time to make a more compact winding of the primary on the core. This
method of winding is very desirable in large coils, as it reduces the
cross section of the primary and allows the secondary to be placed
nearer the core, where the magnetic field is the strongest.

The primary winding ought to occupy nearly the whole length of the core,
since there is no gain in carrying the end of the core very far beyond
the end of the primary, for most of the magnetic lines of force bend at
the end of the primary and return without passing through the extreme
ends of the core.

*Insulating Tube.*The successful operation of an induction coil without
breaking down when under strain depends largely upon the insulating tube
which separates the primary and secondary. Hard rubber tubes are perhaps
the best. A tube may be easily built up of several layers of 1/2-inch
sheet hard rubber by steaming it so as to soften it and then wrapping it
around a form. The tube should fit the primary tightly and be about one
inch shorter than the core. After the tube is in place it is poured full
of beeswax and rosin in order to fill all interstices and prevent sparks
due to the condenser effect of the windings from jumping from the inside
of the tube to the primary.

*Secondary.*A coil used as a wireless telegraph transmitter must have
wire of large cross section in its secondary so as to obtain a heavy
disruptive discharge. Numbers 34 and 32 B. S. are generally used for
small coils and numbers 30 and 28 B. S. for large coils. Silk covered
wire is the usual practice, but enameled wire is coming into use. Cotton
covered wire takes up too much space and has poorer insulating
qualities.

Enameled wire is insulated by a coating of cellulose acetate, which has
a dielectric strength of about twice that of cotton and takes up much
less room than silk. There is, then, with enameled wire a great saving
in space, and a greater number of turns may be placed on the secondary
without increasing its mean distance from the core. The following table
shows the comparative diameters of silk and enamel covered wires
suitable in size for use on the secondaries of induction coils.

In winding enameled wire it must be taken into consideration that the
insulation of enameled wire is rigid and has no give. Consequently, to
allow for expansion, enameled wire must be more loosely wound than fiber
or silk covered wire. The occasional insertion of a layer of paper in
winding will give room for expansion and at the same time not add
greatly to the diameter.

[Illustration: Fig. 27. Theoretical and practical form of secondary.]

The length of the secondary is generally not much more than one-half the
length of the core. Coils giving sparks up to 2 inches in length may be
wound in two sections or in layer windings, but the layer winding is not
recommended for coils giving sparks over one inch. It is best in a coil
of this kind to insert an occasional layer of paper. The paper should be
well shellacked or paraffined and be of a good grade of linen. It should
project about one-quarter of an inch from the ends of the secondary as
shown by the sectional drawing in Fig. 28.

This insertion of paper increases the insulation and renders the
liability of sparks jumping from layer to layer much less, as is the
case when the layers are very long.

[Illustration: Fig. 28. Layer Winding for Small Coils.]

The secondaries of large coils are made up of "pies" or "pancakes" from
one-eighth to three-eighths of an inch in thickness. The "pies" are
separated from each other by a triple thickness of blotting paper which
has been thoroughly dried and then soaked in melted paraffin. In cutting
the blotting paper, much labor may be saved if a metal template of the
required size is first cut from sheet brass and then laid on the
blotting paper, which is cut by scoring around the edge of the template
with a sharp knife.

[Illustration: Fig. 29. Section Winder.]

The "pies" are wound in a bobbin or form such as is shown in Fig. 29.

The disks or flanges are made of sheet brass and mounted on an arbor so
that the form may be placed in a lathe or some other contrivance for
revolving it. The core is beveled in order to facilitate the removal of
a completed "pie" from the winder. The flanges of the winder are clamped
against the core by two nuts placed on either side. The "pie" is removed
by unscrewing one of the nuts and removing one of the flanges.

In winding silk covered wire it is first passed through a mixture of
beeswax and rosin or a bath of melted paraffin. The excess of wax is
removed by passing the wire through a slit made in a pad of paper or by
rubbing against a piece of felt. Fig. 30 shows such a contrivance.

[Illustration: Fig. 30. Impregnator for Silk Covered Wire.]

The wire passes from the reel over an ordinary spool down into the pan
of paraffin, out of the paraffin, over another spool, and rubs against a
piece of felt to remove the surplus paraffin. The spools are mounted
with a screw and a washer so that they will turn without friction.

The wire is guided, when winding, by the fingers. If it is wrapped with
a piece of felt and held between the thumb and forefinger it will run
without friction and not cut the fingers. It is necessary that the wire
should be closely watched for kinks, etc. which would cause the wire to
break. Oftentimes the wire is broken but is held together by the
insulation. Therefore each "pie" should be tested for continuity when
completed. This is best accomplished by means of a galvanometer and
battery. All imperfect "pies" should be rejected, as one of them would
cause serious trouble if embodied in the coil. In soldering the
secondary wires, acid _must not be used_ as it soon corrodes the fine
wires. Rosin is the best flux for this purpose. When building a small
coil with a "layer" winding it is absolutely necessary that the wire
should be wound on in smooth even layers. In a built-up secondary having
"pies" not greater than 1/4 inch in thickness such great care is not
necessary.

[Illustration: Fig. 31. Methods of Connecting the Secondary Sections.]

Fig. 31 shows the methods of connecting up the pies or pancakes. In _A_,
the inside of one section is connected to the outside of the next, and
so on. The maximum voltage which can exist between the adjacent sections
in this case is equal to the e.m.f. generated by one "pie" and is equal
throughout. In _B_, the coils are connected alternately inside and out.
The voltage ranges from zero at the points where they are connected, to
a value equal to twice the e.m.f. developed by one section. It would
seem that there would be a saving in insulation space of one-half in the
first case, but it is not so since the connecting wire passes between
the "pies" and therefore the insulation must be twice as thick or
exactly equal to that in the second case. The latter method (Fig. 31 B)
is the best and most convenient. When the "pies" are connected in this
manner the current must flow through alternate sections in opposite
directions. To accomplish this it is not necessary to wind every
alternate coil in an opposite direction, but merely to turn them around
and connect them with the direction of their windings reversed as shown
by the arrows and the bevels in Fig. 31. The connections between the
sections must be very carefully soldered.

After the secondary is assembled the coil should be placed in a tight
receptacle or tank containing melted paraffin. The tank is then
connected to an air pump or aspirator and the air exhausted. The
diminution of pressure causes any air bubbles in the windings to expand
and be pumped out. After standing a while, the pressure of the
atmosphere is readmitted and the place of the bubbles will be occupied
by paraffin which has been forced in under pressure.

*Mounting.*A coil for wireless work is best mounted as shown in Fig. 32
and used with an independent interrupter. The coil may then be placed
under the operating table or on the wall, out of harms way, and the
interrupter on the table, where it is handy to the adjustment of the
operator.

[Illustration: Fig. 32. Coil Case.]

The case is simply a rectangular hardwood box large enough to contain
the completed coil. Two binding posts mounted on the side of the box
connect with the primary winding and two on the top of the box lead to
the secondary terminals. The box is filled with boiled oil or melted
paraffin and sealed up by screwing on the lid. If desirable, the
secondary binding posts may be mounted on the top of a short piece of
hard rubber rod as illustrated in the drawing.

     Magnetic permeability is the conducting power for lines of
      magnetic force.

     See _hysteresis_ under Magnetic Detector.




CHAPTER V. INTERRUPTERS.


We now come to what is the greatest source of trouble and annoyance in
an induction coil, namely the interrupter. Too much importance cannot be
attached to this instrument, for upon it depends largely the
satisfactory working of the coil. The operation of an induction coil and
the part played by the interrupter were fully explained in the chapter
on induction coils.

An adjustable interrupter is necessary for large coils, that is, one not
only whose speed may be governed, but also the time and duration of the
break.

[Illustration: Fig. 33. Simple Interrupter.]

The rapidity of oscillation of a mechanical interrupter is a very
different thing from the speed of break. The ideal speed of break is
instantaneous. In wireless telegraphy, very faint signals are heard more
distinctly in telephone receivers if the rate of interruption at the
station sending them is high. The human ear is somewhat more sensitive
to sounds higher than those ordinarily produced in the telephone
receivers of a wireless receptor. This seems to argue the use of a
high-speed interrupter to make and break the current. But the effect on
the coil must also be considered.

In the first place, where a condenser is shunted across the terminals of
the secondary as is the case with a wireless transmitter, a high-speed
interrupter would be very likely to set up harmful oscillations in the
secondary of the coil itself.

Second, if too fast, the rise and fall of the secondary currents will be
caused to run into each other, since the break will occur before the
primary current has reached a maximum and the reverse secondary current
has died away.

Third, the diameter of the core of a wireless coil is generally much
larger than that of the ordinary coil, and if a very rapid interrupter
is employed there is not time enough to properly magnetize the core
before the current is broken.

Fourth, the strength of the losses in the core caused by the eddy
currents and hysteresis are proportional to the interruptions in the
primary circuit and therefore a low speed will be the most efficient. A
rapid interrupter requires a higher voltage and amperage than the same
interrupter run at a lower speed.

These are some of the reasons why it is very desirable to use an atomic
interrupter or one so adjustable that the rate of the time and duration
of the "make" and "break" may be closely regulated. An ideal interrupter
is designed to give the longest time possible after contact is
established and before the "break" occurs.

It does not pay to construct an interrupter for an induction coil giving
sparks up to 2 inches in length. The type of interrupter in use on
automobile coils is perfectly well adapted to small coils, and may be
purchased complete with the platinum points for as low a price as $1.50.

The mechanical break described below is designed so that various
adjustments are possible and it may be adapted to almost any coil. Since
it is independent, it need not be mounted directly on the coil, but may
be placed in the position most convenient to the operator for
adjustment. The interrupter will not operate coils well on an
electromotive force above 30 volts, for the excessive voltage causes a
spark at the contacts when the circuit is broken and prolongs the
decadence of the primary current.

[Illustration: Fig. 34. Independent Interrupter.]

*Independent Atomic Interrupter.*Fig. 34 illustrates two views of the
interrupter. Current is furnished to the electromagnets by a six volt
battery independent of the source supplying the coil. The interrupter is
set in operation by closing the circuit breaker on the aerial switch.
When the primary circuit of the transmitter is then completed by
pressing the key, the coil will respond immediately because the
interrupter is already in vibration.

The electromagnets (Fig. 35) are a pair of four ohm telegraph sounder
magnets. A hole is bored in the center of the top of each magnet core
and threaded with an 8-32 tap so that the pole pieces may be fastened
thereto, The shape and dimensions of these projections, which must be
made of soft iron, are illustrated in Fig. 35.

[Illustration: Fig. 35. Details of Magnets.]

A soft iron yoke _Y_, 2 1/2 x 7/8 x 1/4 inches, connects the bottom of
the magnets and supports them in an upright position. An 8-32 machine
screw passing upward through the base and yoke holds them firmly. The
base is preferably of hard rubber 4 x 3 1/4 x 3/4 inches.

[Illustration: Fig. 36. Details of Moving Parts.]

The moving parts are illustrated in Fig. 36. The main spring, _D_, is a
strip of spring steel, 2 1/8 inches long, 1/2 inch wide, and 1/32 inch
thick. The soft iron armature, _A_, is fastened to the spring by means
of two small 4-36 machine screws. _M_ is a piece of brass rod, 1 1/2
inches long, bent in the form of a hook and threaded with a 4-36 die to
screw in a similarly threaded hole in the back of the armature _A_. The
hooked portion of _M_ is fitted with a small piece of hard rubber rod,
_R_, to insulate it where it comes into contact with the spring, _G_.
The spring, _D_, carries a second hook, _E_, riveted to the center of
the spring 1 5/8 inches from the lower end. The hook, which is about 3/8
inch long, passes through a hole in the top of the spring, _F_, and
engages it so that it is set in operation by the vibratory motion of the
spring, _D_. The spring, _F_, is 1 3/4 inches long, 5/16 inch wide, and
ir 1/64 inch thick. It carries a platinum rivet 3/4 inch from its lower
end. The spring, _G_, is 2 1/2 inches long, 5/16 inch wide and 1/64 inch
thick. A heavy platinum rivet is fastened 2 1/4 inches from the lower
end. An elongated hole, 1/4 inch long and 3/16 inch wide, permits the
hook, _M_, to pass through the opening. A 5/32 inch hole, 1 1/4 inches
from the bottom, allows the adjusting screw to pass through and make
contact with the platinum rivet on the spring, _F_.

Two rectangular pieces of brass, _O_, 1 1/4 x 1/2 x 5/16 inches are
fastened to the base to support the springs.

[Illustration: Fig. 37. Details of Standard and Screws.]

The standard, _U_, supporting the adjusting thumbscrews is a piece of
3/8-inch brass, 2 1/2 inches high. It tapers from 1 1/2 inches at the
bottom to 3/4 inch at the top. A hole 2 1/4 inches from the bottom is
threaded with a 10-32 tap to receive the thumbscrew, _B_. A second hole
1 1/4 inches from the base is threaded with an 8-32 tap to fit the
adjusting screw, _S_.

Both of the adjusting thumbscrews carry heavy platinum points. The
standard is held upright to the base by means of two machine screws
passing through the base.

A 3/32 inch brass rod 1 3/4 inches long is threaded to fit a hole in the
top of the armature. A sliding weight, _W_, may be clamped in any
position on the rod by means of a thumb-screw. Raising or lowering the
position of the weight decreases or increases the natural period of
vibration of the interrupter. Screwing the hook, _M_, in or out so as to
shorten or lengthen it, decreases or increases the ratio of the make to
the break.

[Illustration: Fig. 38. Diagram of Connections for an Independent
Interrupter.]

Fig. 38 shows a diagram of the connections of the interrupter. The
standard, the thumbscrew, _B_, and the spring, _G_, form part of the
primary circuit of the induction coil. The standard, the thumbscrew,
_S_, the spring, _F_, and the electromagnets are placed in series with a
six-volt battery and connected to the circuit breaker on the aerial
switch, so that when the switch is thrown in position for transmitting,
the interrupter will be set in operation.

A condenser must be shunted across the larger contacts of the
interrupter in order to hasten the demagnetization of the core of the
induction coil and create a higher e.m.f. in the secondary. The
condenser must be suited in size to the induction coil with which the
interrupter is to be used and so the following table is appended to
serve as a guide.

The condensers are built up of alternate sheets of tin foil and
paraffined paper. Connections are made to the sheets by means of tin
foil strips which project out alternately from opposite sides as in the
illustration.

The paper should be about two inches larger each way so as to leave a
one inch margin on all sides of the tin foil.

[Illustration: Fig. 39. Construction of a Paper Condenser.]

When the alternate sheets of tin foil and paper have all been assembled,
the condenser is warmed so as to soften the paraffin. It is then placed
between two flat boards and subjected to great pressure in a letter
press or a vice. The capacity of a pressed condenser is often several
times that of a condenser of the same dimensions but not pressed.

*Mercury Interrupters.*The mercury turbine interrupter is one of the
most convenient and successful breaks in use. The construction is such
that a stream of mercury is made to play against a number of saw shaped
metal teeth. A spiral worm terminating in a nozzle at the top is rapidly
revolved by an electric motor. The lower end of the tubular worm dips in
a mercury reservoir, so that when the spiral is revolved the mercury is
caused by centrifugal action to rise in the tube and be thrown out in
the form of a jet at the upper end. When the revolving jet strikes one
of the metal teeth, the circuit is closed and the current flows from the
mercury jet into the teeth. When the mercury jet passes between the
openings between the teeth, the circuit is interrupted. By raising and
lowering the saw teeth so that the mercury strikes either the lower or
upper part of them, the ratio between the make and break may be made
smaller or larger. By regulating the speed of the motor driving the jet,
the number of interruptions may be varied from 10 to 10,000 per second.
The bottom and sides of the mercury reservoir are ribbed to prevent the
mercury from attaining a rotary motion.

A somewhat simpler and more easily constructed type of mercury
interrupter consists of a hard rubber disk having a brass rod running
through from the periphery to the center, where it connects with the
shaft. The lower edge of the disk dips at an angle in a mercury bath and
is rapidly revolved by an electric motor. When the rod is under the
surface of the mercury, the circuit is made through the mercury to the
rod. The circuit is broken when the rod is above the surface. The
mercury is covered with a layer of alcohol, which prevents excessive
sparking and makes a quicker break. An interrupter of this kind when run
by a motor of the magnetic attraction type is exceedingly simple.

The break of any of the mercury type interrupters when properly adjusted
is much quicker than the hammer spring break and gives thicker sparks.

After the mercury has been in use awhile it becomes churned up into
small globules of a black color, but may be easily cleaned and restored
for use by shaking up with some strong sulphuric acid. Care must be
taken that the mercury is perfectly dry and free from acid before
replacing in the interrupter.

*Electrolytic Interrupters.*Fig. 40 shows a diagram of a Wehnelt
interrupter. The cathode or negative electrode is a lead plate immersed
in dilute sulphuric acid. The anode is a piece of platinum wire placed
in a porcelain tube and projecting through a small hole in the bottom,
so that only a very small surface of the wire is exposed to the liquid.
When a strong electrical current is passed through the acid electrolyte,
the current is very rapidly interrupted by the formation of gases on the
small platinum electrode. The speed of the interrupter is variable
through great ranges by moving the platinum electrode up or down and
changing the amount of surface exposed to the liquid. The only
disadvantage of this interrupter is that the electrolyte soon becomes
heated, and unless the interrupter is provided with a water jacket or
some device for cooling, the bubbles of gas do not form freely. A
potential of at least 40 volts is required to operate a Wehnelt or other
electrolytic break.

[Illustration: Fig. 40. Wenhelt and Simon Electrolytic Interrupters.]

A Wehnelt interrupter may easily be made by sealing a platinum wire in a
glass tube. It is well to make several such tubes with the platinum
projecting from one-sixteenth to one-quarter of an inch. The different
tubes will each have a different speed of interruption, and one should
be picked out which seems to be most suitable for the coil upon testing.
Connection to the platinum wire is established by filling the tube with
mercury and dipping a wire in it.

Fig. 40 also shows a diagram of a Simon electrolytic interrupter. It
consists of a vessel containing dilute sulphuric acid and divided into
two parts by a thin porcelain diaphragm having a small hole in the
center. A lead electrode dips into each of the divisions. The
interruption is caused by exceeding a certain current density in the
small hole at the diaphragm. Upon the passage of the current the liquid
is so heated that it becomes vaporized. The vapor is a poor conductor to
low voltages and so the current is broken. Immediately upon the
cessation of the current, the vapor condenses and the circuit is
established again. This cycle repeats itself with a speed depending upon
the size of the aperture and the amount of current flowing.

A crude form of this type of interrupter may be made by heating the end
of a test tube in a pin flame, and then blowing on the open end of the
tube so as to burst the soft glass and form a small hole. Several such
test tubes should be prepared having holes varying from 1/32 to 1/8 of
an inch in diameter. The one which gives the best results upon trial is
selected for use. A number of holes in a single tube, if not too many or
too large in diameter, increases the efficiency and the speed of
interruption. The tube should be immersed in a glass jar containing
dilute sulphuric acid. One lead electrode is placed inside of the test
tube and the other outside. It makes no difference which way the current
flows through this interrupter.

The Caldwell interrupter is a modification of the Simon type in which
the size of the aperture is made adjustable by means of a pointed glass
rod which may be raised or lowered in the hole and the speed of
interruption varied. An interrupter of the test tube type as described
above may be modified to this form by locating the hole directly in the
center of the bottom of the tube and inserting in it a hard glass rod
which has been drawn out to a point.

Electrolytic interrupters do not require any condenser connected across
the break.

[Illustration: Fig. 41. Construction of Electrolytic Interrupters.]

Fig. 41 shows in section more substantial forms of both the Wehnelt and
Simon-Caldwell interrupters. The containers are ordinary 5 x 7 inch
battery jars. They are fitted with covers made of two thicknesses, _C_
and _B_, of 3/4-inch wood. The upper piece, _C_, is 6 inches in
diameter, while the under one should fit snugly into the interior of the
jar. The wood must be boiled in paraffin to protect it from the action
of the acid. A slit is made in the left-hand side of both covers for the
passage of a lead electrode, _L_, 1 inch wide and 1/4 inch thick. The
upper end of the electrode is bent over and fitted with a binding post.

[Illustration: Fig. 42. Details of Electrolytic Interrupters.]

The mechanism for adjusting the interrupters is the same in both cases.
The dimensions are indicated in Fig. 42. A brass yoke, _Y_, is mounted
on the cover in the position shown. A 1/2-inch hole is bored through the
upper part of the yoke and a piece of brass tubing, _S_, 1 inch long
soldered in a vertical position in the hole. A 1/4-inch threaded brass
rod passes through the tube, 5. A groove is milled in A along its entire
length and engages a pin in the wall of _S_. The rod is thus enabled to
slide up and down in the tube but is prevented from revolving. A fiber
head, _H_, is fitted with a brass sleeve or bushing in its center. The
bushing should fit tightly into the fiber head and is threaded to fit
the rod, _A_. The electrode may then be carefully raised or lowered by
revolving the head. The tube, _V_, for the Simon-Caldwell interrupter is
a hard glass test tube. A 1/8-inch hole is blown in the bottom of the
tube. A hard glass rod, _G_, is drawn out to a point and fastened to the
lower end of the rod, _A_, by means of a short length of flexible rubber
tubing, _R_.

The tube, N, for the Wehnelt break is made from a piece of hard rubber
tubing 6 inches long, having a bore of J inch.

[Illustration: Fig. 43. Electrolytic Interrupter.]

The lower end is fitted with a spark plug porcelain. The porcelain must
fit the tube tightly and not leak. The electrode, _P_, is a piece of
brass wire which will just pass through the hole in the porcelain. The
upper end of the electrode, _P_, is soldered or fastened otherwise to
the lower end of the rod, _A_.

A small hole, _h_, should be made in the tubes, _N_ and _V_, above the
level of the electrolyte in the jar. When the interrupter is in
operation the electrolyte gradually rises in the tubes, and would
corrode the lower end of _A_ if it were not able to pass out through the
vents.

In the Simon-Caldwell interrupter, a strip of lead passes from the
binding post mounted on the foot of the yoke down inside of the test
tube. The size of the hole in the tube is regulated by revolving the
fiber head so that the glass pointed rod will be inserted in or
withdrawn from the hole.

The frequency of the interruption will also depend somewhat on the
concentration of the acid solution. It is therefore best to start with a
weak solution and add acid slowly until it is of the proper strength.




CHAPTER VI. TRANSFORMERS.


Where alternating current is available in commercial wireless telegraph
stations, the induction coil has been gradually superseded by the more
modern transformer for charging the oscillation condenser. Since the
transformer is less expensive to construct than an induction coil
capable of transmitting the same distance, it is favored by many amateur
experimenters. A one quarter kilowatt transformer has a sending range of
over 50 miles when used with a properly constructed aerial about 80 feet
high. This is probably the size best suited to the average private
installation.

The secondary of a wireless transformer seldom develops potentials
exceeding 15,000 to 20,000 volts, while those of an induction coil range
from 1 5,000 to 300,000 volts. However, the strength of the secondary
current of a transformer is so much greater than that of an induction
coil, that more powerful and penetrating waves are developed. For these
reasons a transformer is always rated by its output in watts or
kilowatts rather than by the spark length produced at the secondary
terminals. The spark of a one quarter kilowatt transformer is only 0.25
to 0.50 of an inch, while the spark of a one half kilowatt transformer
may be the same length but still represent more energy.

There are two distinct types of transformers in use, known as the "open"
and "closed," accordingly whether the core is straight like the core of
an induction coil or in the form of a hollow rectangle. The open core
type is used in the government stations and by the United Wireless
Telegraph Co. It is the simpler and more easily constructed of the two,
but is also less efficient and requires that more material be expended
to bring it up to a definite rating. In principle it is simply an
induction coil operated on alternating current minus the interrupter and
condenser. In view of the greater currents employed, the windings must
be larger and heavier than those of the induction coil to prevent
heating.

Before commencing the construction of a transformer one should read the
chapter on induction coils and use the same care emphasized there in
regard to building coils.

*Open Core Transformer.*The transformer described below will transmit
from 20 to 75 miles and consume about 300 watts on the no volt 60 cycle
alternating current.

The core is 16 inches long and 2 inches in diameter. It is built up of
soft iron wires in the same manner as if it were the core of an
induction coil.

The primary is composed of two layers of No. 14 double cotton covered B.
S. gauge magnet wire. The primary is 14 inches long and is wrapped with
a layer of micanite cloth 3/8 inch thick to separate it from the
secondary winding.

It is never advisable to use shellacked cotton cloth as insulation. When
cotton is dried and shellacked, it is at first a good insulator, but
soon becomes capable of absorbing moisture. Shellac carbonizes at a low
temperature, and if a transformer or coil having any of this sort of
insulation entering into its construction is overheated, the insulation
is liable to become a conductor. Micanite cloth is the best insulation
for transformers. The dielectric strengths of the different forms of
micanite are shown by the following table.

The secondary is wound in ten sections over the micanite insulation.
Each section is 6 inches in diameter and 1 1/4 inches thick and is wound
with No. 30 B. S. single silk covered wire. The sections are separated
by disks of blotting paper 1/8 inch thick and 7 inches in diameter,
treated as described in Chapter IV. The completed transformer should be
placed in a box and covered with oil.

*A One Quarter Kilowatt Closed Core Transformer.* The simplest form of a
closed core transformer consists of two independent coils of insulated
wire wound upon an iron ring. When an alternating current is passed
through one of the coils, known as the primary, it generates a magnetic
flux in the iron core. The lines of force passing through the core
induce in the secondary coil an electromotive force the magnitude of
which is in nearly the same ratio to the primary inducing electromotive
force as the number of turns of wire in the secondary is to the number
of turns in the primary. For example, if it is desired to raise the
potential of the no volt alternating current to 22,000 volts, the number
of turns in the secondary of the transformer must be at least 200 times
the number in the primary.

A circular ring of iron wire presents several theoretical advantages as
a transformer core but it would be difficult to form and afterwards
place the windings in position. The core is therefore usually in the
form of a hollow rectangle, built up of very thin sheets or laminations
of soft iron carefully insulated from one another by a coat of varnish.
If the core were solid or the separate laminations not insulated from
one another, heavy currents, known as eddy currents, would be set up in
the iron and cause heating. A considerable loss in the efficiency of the
transformer would also result.

One half of both the secondary and the primary windings of a properly
designed transformer are placed on opposite sides or "legs" of the core
in order to reduce the magnetic leakage and increase the efficiency. The
only difficulty involved in such construction is the proper insulation
of the primary from the secondary, but if careful attention is given to
this point no difficulty will be experienced.

*Core.*The dimensions and method of assembling the core laminations are
indicated by Fig. 44. Long strips are cut from soft Russian or Swedish
stovepipe iron. The strips, which are 1 3/4 inches wide are then cut up
into short lengths, one half of which are 7 3/4 inches long and the
other half 4 3/4 inches. Enough are cut to form two piles of each size 1
3/4 inches high when compressed. The completed core will then form a
hollow rectangle 9 1/2 x 6 1/2 x 1 3/4 inches.

[Illustration: Fig. 44. Assembly and Dimensions of Core.]

The strips must be dipped in some good insulating varnish such as P. &
B. compound and thoroughly dried before they are assembled. Both "legs"
(the longest sides) are laid on a table with the alternate ends
overlapping as shown by _A_ and _B_ in Fig. 44. After the short pieces
_C_ and _D_ have been slipped between the overlapping ends the whole
core is squared up. The strips _D_ are then carefully removed and one
end of the core thus left open until all the windings are in place.
Three or four layers of well varnished linen cloth are wound tightly
over the "legs" preparatory to winding on the primary.

*Primary.*Four fiber heads, _H_, 4 3/4 inches square, 1/2 inch thick
and having a square hole 1 7/8 x 1 7/8 inches cut in the center are
required. One of the fiber heads is placed on each end of the assembled
"leg" as shown in Fig. 48.

[Illustration: Fig. 45. Fiber Head and Separator.]

The primary winding is wound in six layers, 4 1/2 inches long, three
layers on each "leg." About three pounds of No. 16 B. S. gauge double
cotton covered magnet wire are required for the winding. The terminals
of the two halves of the primary are led through the fiber heads at the
same end of the transformer. The windings are not to be carried close up
to the fiber heads but begin and end about 1/4 inch from them, so that
the remaining space may be filled by winding in a strip of micanite
cloth 1/4 inch wide. The primary and secondary windings are separated by
a strip of micanite cloth 5 inches wide, wound over both of the primary
windings close up to the heads until a layer 1/2 inch thick is formed.

*Secondary.*The form on which the secondary sections are wound is
illustrated in Fig. 46. All the parts are cut out of wood except the
shaft and are made of the dimensions indicated. If the center of the
form is slightly tapered it will greatly facilitate the removal of the
completed sections. Sixteen sections are required. When removed from the
winder they will be in the form of hollow squares 4 1/2 x 4 1/2 x 7/16
inches.

[Illustration: Fig. 46. Section Form.]

About ten pounds of No. 34 B. S. gauge silk covered wire are required to
wind the sections. Cotton covered wire must not be used to avoid
expense, because with it a sufficient number of secondary turns cannot
be secured to bring the secondary current up to the proper voltage. By
observing explicitly the instructions and precautions given below no
trouble will be experienced in handling enameled wire and forming the
sections. The form should be placed in a lathe chuck or some other
machine which is convenient and whereby the form may be rapidly revolved
under the control of the operator.

Saw slots are cut in the wooden flanges and the center of the form as
shown in the illustration so that silk threads may be passed under and
around the completed section and tied so that a possible "cave in" of
the wire is prevented. After tying up the section should be removed from
the form by unscrewing the nut and taking off the flange.

[Illustration: Fig. 47. Methods of Connecting Sections.]

When winding the wire it must be very carefully watched for loops or
kinks and only be laid on in even layers. It must also be borne in mind
that enameled wire cannot be as tightly wound as fiber covered wire for
reasons heretofore explained. In case the wire becomes broken, it must
be smoothly spliced and soldered. Do not under any consideration use
acid as a flux or heat the wire with a flame. Acid will corrode the fine
wire, and the flame will badly oxidize or melt it. Use a short piece of
No. 8 B. S. gauge tinned copper wire set in a small file handle as a
soldering iron, and rosin as a flux. Paraffin some silk binding tape
such as dressmakers use and wrap the joint with a small piece. The
sections as they are removed from the winder must be taped and then
carefully marked with an arrow which points in the direction of the
winding.

Fig. 47 illustrates the two methods of connecting up the sections. It
will be noticed in the second method that the arrow denoting the
direction of winding points down on every alternate section. This does
not indicate necessarily that every alternate section is wound in an
opposite direction from the other, but that they have merely been turned
around so that the arrows come on a reverse side of the core and point
in an opposite direction. This precaution must be taken in order that
the current will flow through all the sections, and is made necessary
because the inside terminal of one section is connected to the inside
terminal of the adjacent section and the outside terminal of that
section is connected to the outside terminal of the next adjacent
section. The first method, _A_, illustrated in Fig. 44, is less
complicated and does not require this reversal, but for various reasons
is not to be recommended in place of _B_.

Eight of the completed and taped sections are placed on each "leg" of
the transformer, with one of the fiber separators between each pair as
in Figs. 48 and 49. When each "leg" has been completely assembled,
solder all the secondary terminals together so as to connect as in Fig.
47.

[Illustration: Fig. 48. Assembly of Leg.]

Then place the remaining fiber head, _S_, on each of the "legs" and
finish assembling the core by slipping in the end strips _D_.

Square the core up perfectly true and fasten by four fiber strips _M_,
Fig. 49, 9 3/4 inches long, 1 3/4 inches wide and 1/2-inch thick. The
strips are placed in the position shown in Fig. 46 and a hole _P_ bored
in the end of each. Four 1/4-inch bolts, two of which are 3 inches long
and two 3 1/2 inches, pass through the holes in the strips, so that when
the nuts are screwed on the core is clamped firmly. The two longer bolts
are placed at the same end of the transformer.

[Illustration: Fig. 49. Transformer with One Secondary removed.]

The terminals of the primary lead out to four binding posts mounted on
the fiber strips. The pillars which support the secondary binding posts
are fiber rods, 1 inch in diameter and 2 inches long. The lower end of
each is bored and tapped to fit the upper ends of the longer bolts which
clamp the fiber strips together. An insulating shield must be placed
between the two secondary windings to prevent sparks from jumping
across. A piece of fiber 5 x 5 x 1/8 inches will serve nicely for this
purpose. If the primary windings are placed in series the transformer
will consume about 300 watts. When the transformer is placed in a box
and the box filled with some boiled amber petroleum, the windings may be
connected in parallel and the transformer will consume about 500 watts.
It will then transmit over 100 miles providing the aerial is at least
100 feet high.

The wiring connections are diagramed in Fig. 50. A variable inductance
or reactance coil is connected in series with the primary circuit to
steady the current, as explained in the paragraph under reactance. A
reactance suitable for this transformer may be constructed by winding
two layers of No. 12 B. S. gauge cotton covered wire, six inches long,
around a hollow wooden tube made of cigar box wood. The core is built up
of soft sheet iron to form a rectangle 8 x 1 3/4 x 1 3/4 inches which
will just slide in and out of the tube. The windings should be about six
inches long.

[Illustration: Fig. 50. Wiring Diagram.]

Five half-gallon Leyden jars form about the right capacity for the
secondary of the transformer when the windings are in series. Twice that
number must be used when the windings are in parallel.

The secondary sections must always be kept in series, as otherwise the
voltage would not be high enough to properly charge the condenser.



Construction of a 2-K.W. Transformer.


*Core.*Strips 2 1/2 inches wide are cut from soft sheet iron. One half
of them should be 11 1/2 inches long and the other half 6 1/2 inches.
Enough are cut to make two piles of each size 2 1/2 inches high. Both
sides (the longest strips) of the core are built up with the ends
overlapping as in Fig. 41.

The ends (the short pieces) are then slipped between the overlapping
ends of the long strips and the whole core squared up. The completed
core should have a cross section of 2 1/2 inches square and form a
hollow rectangle 8 x 14 inches. The strips of iron must be dipped in P.
& B. insulating varnish and dried before they are assembled.

*Primary.*Four fiber heads 6 inches square, 1/2 inch thick and having a
hole 2 1/2 inches square are made. One of these is placed on the core
legs as shown by Fig. 48. Two or three layers of well varnished linen
are wound over the core preparatory to winding the primary. Room must be
left for the other head to be placed on the opposite end after the
windings are all in place. The primary consists of 100 double turns of
No. 12 B. S. gauge double cotton covered magnet wire. Fifty of the
double turns are wound on each leg. The four terminals of the primary
are led out through the fiber heads. Care should be taken to distinguish
them from each other so that they may be identified when the transformer
is completed. The primary is then wound with a strip of micanite or
empire cloth 8 inches wide until it measures 4 inches square over all.

*Secondary.*The secondary coils, which are eight in number, are wound
on a form 4 inches square and 1 1/2 inches between the flanges. The
construction of the form is similar to that shown in Fig. 46 but is
larger. The slots are also necessary here so that the completed section
may be tied up.

About ten pounds of No. 30 B. S. gauge single silk covered wire are
required to wind the secondary. The sections are wound in smooth even
layers until they are six inches in outside diameter. They are then tied
up and removed from the winder. The sections are separated by sheets of
fiber 6 1/2 inches square on the outside, 1/2 inch thick, having a hole
4 inches square cut in the center. The sections are all connected in
series and the terminals soldered to strips of copper.

After the secondary coils are all in place and connected, the fiber head
is slipped on the end of the leg. Then the short lengths of the core,
which had been pulled out again after squaring the core up, are slipped
into place. The core is squared up again and fastened together by boring
a 3/8-inch hole completely through the core at each corner. Two strips
of fiber 12 x 2 1/2 x 1/2 inches are bored with corresponding holes in
their ends. These strips are placed at the end of the transformer, on
top of the core, and 1/4-inch bolts passed through the holes in the
fiber and the core. The bolts are wrapped with micanite cloth where they
pass through the core, and an insulating washer is placed under the
nuts, so that the iron core laminations are not electrically connected.
The nuts are tightened until the core is held firmly together.

The fiber strips also serve as insulated supports for the binding posts.
The copper terminals of the secondary lead to two binding posts mounted
on two fiber or hard rubber pillars 1 inch diameter and 4 inches high.
The rods are arranged as explained in the section under the heading of a
1/4-K.W. transformer.

The transformer is designed for use on a 60-cycle 110-volt current. It
may be used on 220 volts if the two primary coils are connected in
series. When the primaries are in series, and the transformer is used on
the 110-volt current, it will deliver a voltage of about 12,000 at the
secondary. With either primary alone the voltage will be about 12,000,
and with both in parallel about 25,000. It will then deliver a very
heavy current at the secondary and draw from the line about 20 amperes
in the primary. If used with a proper tuning helix, condenser and
aerial, the transformer is capable of sending about 300 miles under
favorable conditions.

If the transformer is to be used for long periods at a time, it is best
to place it in a tight wooden box 18 inches square and 12 inches deep.
The box is then filled with boiled linseed oil or amber petroleum.

A rheostat or impedance and reactance coil should be placed in series
with the transformer to regulate the current and also to prevent arcing
across the spark gap.

*Reactance.*In Chapter I, the lag and lead of a circuit were explained
in connection with tuning. This is a property of every alternating
circuit and is brought to our notice again in the transformer which
charges the condenser. The current developed by a transformer is a
leading current, since the instantaneous values of the current do not
correspond to the proportionate values of the voltage supplying the
current. In order to force the current values of the charging current to
correspond with the voltage it is necessary to produce a "lag." This is
accomplished by means of an adjustable reactance in series with the
primary of the transformer.

A reactance or inductance suitable for the 2-K.W. transformer may be
made by building up a coil in the same manner as described under the
heading of the J-K.W. transformer. The reactance will have to be
somewhat larger on account of the heavier currents. The core is built up
of sheet iron to measure 2 1/2 x 2 1/2 x 10 inches when completed. The
coil is wound around a wooden form and is composed of about 100 turns of
No. 8 B. S. gauge double cotton covered magnet wire. By varying the
amount of core inserted in the hollow coil the energy may be adjusted as
desired.

[Illustration: Fig. 51. Clapp-Eastham 1/4-K.W. Transformer.]

Fig. 51 illustrates the 1/4-K.W. transformer manufactured by the
Clapp-Eastham Company. The core is so constructed that a small metal
tongue of soft iron projects from one side of the core towards the
opposite side between the windings, but is separated from the opposite
side by a small air gap. Several objects are accomplished by this
tongue, which gives rise to magnetic leakage; the inductance of the
primary is increased thereby to such an extent that the transformer is
self-controlling, so that it may be connected directly to the source of
alternating current supply of ordinary commercial frequencies and
potential, and the current flowing in this circuit be regulated by
varying the number of turns in the primary coil. As this magnetic
leakage gives rise to a loose coupling effect, the primary and secondary
circuits may be brought into resonance by placing a suitable capacity
across the secondary terminals. This condition of resonance brings the
power factor to a materially higher percentage. While the power factor
of the open or closed core transformer is seldom above 50%, this type of
transformer has a power factor of 80 to 90% when used with a suitable
condenser.

[Illustration: Fig. 52. United Wireless Motor-Generator set for
supplying Alternating Current to the Transformer.]

Another point of considerable advantage is the almost entire freedom
from arcing at the spark gap when this type of transformer is used. The
spark gap is connected directly across the secondary terminals of the
transformer and the condenser. The primary turns of the helix and the
spark gap are connected in series. When the transformer is in operation,
this condenser being across the secondary, the transformer is in
resonance and the condenser is charged to such a point that it will jump
the spark gap. At the instant that the spark passes, the secondary of
the transformer is practically short circuited through the spark gap. As
this circuit is now closed and the condenser out of circuit, the
secondary circuit of the transformer is no longer in resonance and the
energy immediately drops off, destroying at once the tendency for an arc
to form. As soon as the spark has passed, the condenser of course comes
in to play and the condition of resonance being reestablished the same
process is repeated. The Clapp-Eastham Company have made application for
a patent on any transformer employing this or any similar construction
for use in charging a condenser.




CHAPTER VII. OSCILLATION CONDENSERS AND LEYDEN JARS.


A condenser consists of two conducting surfaces separated by an
insulator or dielectric. Fig. 53 shows a diagram of a simple condenser
in which _A_ and _B_ are two tinfoil sheets separated by a sheet of
glass, _C_.

[Illustration: Fig. 53. Simple Condenser.]

If _A_ is connected by means of a wire to a static machine a positive
charge will collect on the glass at _A_ and induce a negative charge at
_B_, so that if _A_ and _B_ are connected to a small spark gap the
charge will leap the gap in the form of a spark.

When a condenser discharges through a coil of wire, the discharge
consists of a large number of exceedingly rapid oscillations or
surgings. The first passage of current more than empties the condenser
and it becomes charged in the opposite direction, that is, the
conducting coatings change their polarity. A reverse discharge then
occurs which also oversteps itself and the oscillations thus go on but
become rapidly weaker until they die completely. The time consumed in
the discharge may have been only a fraction of a second, but during that
short period the current perhaps oscillated several thousand times.

If a condenser is discharged through a conductor of high resistance the
discharge passes out slowly, and dies away gradually in one direction
without oscillating. One of the fundamental equations of wireless
telegraphy is therefore that there will be oscillations in a circuit if
the resistance in ohms is not greater than the square root of four times
the inductance in henries divided by the capacity of the condenser in
microfarads.

The capacity or the ability of a condenser to store electricity depends
upon the area and form of the conducting surfaces, the thickness of the
dielectric between them, and a factor known as the specific inductive
capacity of the dielectric. The unit of capacity is called the farad and
is defined as the condenser which would be raised to a potential of one
volt by a charge of one ampere flowing for one second. A condenser of
such a capacity is, because of its enormous size, impractical to
construct, and the unit ordinarily used is therefore the microfarad, or
one millionth of a farad.

Capacity may be calculated from the following formula:

Capacity equals K(A/D),

where _K_ equals a constant depending upon the specific inductive
capacity of the dielectric, _A_ the total area of tinfoil and _D_ the
thickness of the dielectric.

*Leyden Jars.*Transmitting condensers in a wireless telegraph station
usually take the convenient form of a jar, coated inside and out with
tinfoil and known as a Leyden jar.

The jars should be of good Bohemian or Jena hard glass and coated with
tinfoil only for about three-quarters of their height, as otherwise the
discharge is liable to pass over the top. The tinfoil must be thick to
avoid blistering, and is stuck to the glass with shellac varnish. The
blistering of Leyden jars is a serious fault, for when this condition
exists, the capacity is thereby altered to such an extent that the
period of the closed circuit may be sufficiently altered to throw the
system out of tune and decrease the radiation of energy.

Considerable expense may be saved if the glass jars are purchased and
coated by the amateur. The best jars are those imported from Germany,
which have wide mouths so that they may be easily coated inside with
tinfoil.

[Illustration: Fig. 54. Leyden Jar.]

The jars must be _thoroughly_ cleaned and dried before they are coated.
Give the inside a thorough brushing over with shellac varnish, and
before it is dry, carefully insert the tinfoil and press it smoothly
against the glass. The outside of the jar is treated and coated in the
same manner. The inside and outside of the bottom are also coated by
cutting the tinfoil in circular pieces and shellacking them on.

[Illustration: Fig. 55. "Aerial Switch."]

The whole upper part of the jar is given one or two coats of shellac in
order to prevent the collection of moisture and brush discharging. A
wooden plug fitted in the top of the jar supports a brass rod,
terminating at the lower end in a chain or spiral spring which connects
with the inner coating. When trouble is experienced because of an
imperfect contact between the coating and the chain or rod, a layer of
brass filings an inch or two deep placed in the bottom of the jar will
remedy the difficulty. The upper end of the rod usually terminates in a
small brass ball or a binding post.

The wooden plug or cover is dried in an oven to expel all moisture and
then boiled in paraffin.

Small Leyden jars may be very conveniently made from six-inch test tubes
and mounted in a rack so that the capacity of the condenser will be
adjustable by removing one or more of the tubes. An ordinary test tube
rack such as is used in chemical laboratories serves very well for this
purpose. The tubes should be connected in parallel, that is, all the
outside coatings together and all the inside coatings together.

Figs. 55 and 56 illustrate condensers of this type which are on the
market. The tubes are all separately removable so that the capacity may
be adjusted.

[Illustration: Fig. 56. Amco Oscillation Condenser.]

*Glass Plate Condensers.*Glass plate condensers offer several
advantages over Leyden jars and are coming into wide use. They are not
so bulky or expensive and, above all, do not blister.

Plate condensers are often placed in a rack and made adjustable by means
of movable contacts. Much the better plan is to place the plates in oil,
as this eliminates all corona or brush discharges and much sharper
tuning is rendered possible. The container is usually a tight wooden box
filled with oil or paraffin after the plates are in place.

It is impossible to state the size of condenser suitable for induction
coils of a given power or spark length, because many factors such as
inductance, length of aerial, etc., which differ in various stations,
influence the capacity. A condenser of convenient size suitable for
coils or small transformers consuming from 250 to 300 watts is that
described below. It is about the proper size for the small open core and
1/4-K.W. closed core transformers, described in the last chapter.

[Illustration: Fig. 57. Clapp-Eastham Oscillation Condenser.]

The glass plates may be secured by removing the emulsion from old 8 x 10
inch photograph plates. Hot water will soften the gelatin on the plates
so that it may be very easily scraped off. Twenty-four plates of this
size are required. The tinfoil is cut 8 x 8 inches, so that an inch
margin is left on all sides. The alternate sheets are connected together
by heavy tinfoil or thin copper foil strips. The condenser should be
placed in a convenient sized wooden box and poured full of paraffin.

The plate condenser shown in Fig. 57 is of .02 microfarad capacity. The
condenser is mounted in a plain wooden box with several binding posts
brought out, so that the capacity may be varied by connecting in various
sections. The condenser is manufactured and designed by the
Clapp-Eastham Company for use with the transformer illustrated in Fig.
51.

It is very necessary to have the transmitting condenser adjustable so
that its capacity may be varied, for the proper value depends upon the
wave length, spark frequency, power and persistency of the wave train.

When the condenser capacity is too small the spark will be somewhat
flaming like an arc, and the potential to which the aerial is charged
will be low. If too much capacity is used the spark will be very
irregular and intermittent.

[Illustration: Fig. 58. Methods of Varying Capacity.]

Fig. 58 shows condensers connected in series and in parallel and a
combination of the two. Two condensers of equal capacity connected in
parallel have twice the capacity of one, while in series they will have
only one-half the capacity of either. This may be otherwise stated as
the capacity in series is equal to the reciprocal of the sum of the
reciprocals of their capacities separately. By this means of connecting
either in series or in parallel almost any desired adjustment of
capacity may be brought about.

Oftentimes a high voltage may be divided between two condensers by
placing them in series and thus using them safely on a voltage which
would rupture either one alone. For example, two condensers built for
20,000 volts and to be used on 30,000 volts could be made to perform
this duty safely and only undergo a potential of 15,000 volts, which is
a large margin of safety.

It is obvious that if the capacity of the circuit were to remain
constant, four condensers connected up in series-parallel would be
necessary.

In case of several Ley den jars or condensers connected up in a
transmitting circuit, the leads or conducting wires connecting the
various units should all be of as nearly the same length as it is
possible to have them.

The resistance of metallic conductors to high frequency currents is
several times their normal resistance to constant currents. The larger
the diameter of the wire the greater is this ratio. This increase of
resistance is due to the fact that the high frequency currents permeate
wires only a very short distance. In the case of copper, the depth is
only about one three-hundredth of an inch and with other metals much
less. Therefore it is advisable to use as leads and conductors of large
condensers, stranded wires or flat ribbons of sheet copper in order to
present more surface and offer less resistance than solid conductors of
an equal cross sectional area.

Iron must never be used, as its resistance to these currents is over
fifty times that of copper.

After connections are once established between the jars or the condenser
units, they cannot be altered nor the capacity changed without re tuning
the circuits afterwards.




CHAPTER VIII. SPARK GAPS OR OSCILLATORS.


The oscillator or spark gap is one of the most important yet often the
most poorly adjusted part of a wireless station.

To obtain a good oscillatory discharge with little damping it is
necessary that the resistance of the circuit should be kept low, and
since the greatest part of the resistance is in the spark gap it would
appear as if this must be very short. While there are reasons for
keeping it short there are on the other hand very good reasons why it
should not be made too short, and the proper length should be a sort of
compromise to be determined by experiment.

If the gap is too short, the discharge will form an arc and the only
oscillations taking place will be those corresponding to the frequency
of the charging current. Power consumption is also in favor of a long
gap, since it causes the induction coil or transformer to draw less
current from the line. Another argument in favor of a long gap is the
fact that the condenser is charged to a higher voltage and more energy
stored up, which makes a greater distance of transmission possible. But
as stated above (and there always is a tendency for the amateur operator
to open out his gap as long as the sparks will continue to jump
steadily) the discharge will not oscillate but will merely set up a
unidirectional current.

There exists a proper gap length for a given circuit which will cause
that circuit to emit a maximum amount of energy and which may be
determined accurately only by means of a hot-wire ammeter placed in the
aerial circuit. The proper gap length is then indicated by the maximum
deflection of the meter.

The correct adjustment of the gap may be approximated by the experienced
operator. If too short, the spark will be hissing and flaming and is in
extreme cases red or yellow colored. It should be lengthened out until
it is thick and white and a slight increase in sound is noted. The spark
should not be, as commonly thought, stringy and crackling.

Arcing is often caused by insufficient condenser capacity in the
circuit. But if the capacity is increased to remedy the arcing, the gap
length should also be increased or otherwise the potential of the
condenser may not be sufficiently raised to permit a disruptive
discharge to take place.

[Illustration: Fig. 59. Spark Gaps.]

The best spark gap for use with a small untuned transmitter, making use
of neither tuning helix nor condenser, is shown at the left in Fig. 59.
It consists of two brass balls supported on suitable double binding
posts. The balls tend to thicken the spark and make it more disruptive
than if it passed between rods or points. The balls also increase the
potential required to leap the gap without increasing its length and
permit the aerial to become more highly charged before a discharge takes
place. For this reason the balls or knobs must always be kept free from
small rough spots or points by frequent polishing.

Silver has some peculiar property which makes it the most efficient
material for a spark gap, but its cost prohibits its use and so brass or
zinc, which are next in order, is generally used.

The type of gap illustrated at the right in Fig. 59 is very convenient
and efficient for small tuned transmitters employing coils of low power.

[Illustration: Fig. 60. Spark Gap.]

The zinc tips are pieces of 3/8-inch zinc battery rod 3/4 inch long.
They are bored and threaded to fit a pair of brass rods 1/8 inch
diameter and 2 1/2 inches long. The rods are supported by two double
binding posts and are fitted with two pieces of hard rubber rod 1/2 inch
diameter and 1 inch long to serve as handles. If desirable one of the
rods and binding posts may be threaded so that the adjustment of the gap
can be accomplished by revolving the handle and screwing the gap in or
out.

A gap of the size and type just described would not be suitable in
connection with a large transformer or an induction coil. The heavy
discharge of such powerful instruments would very rapidly heat the small
brass parts and corrode or even melt the zinc. The spark gap such as is
shown in Fig. 59 may be used with a very large coil or the two kilowatt
transformer if the same proportions are kept and it is made one-half
again as large. Using the dimensions shown in the figure, the spark gap
is suited to either the open core or the 1/4 and 1/2 kilowatt
transformers.

Two pieces of hard rubber rod, 3/4 inch diameter and 2 inches long serve
as the standards. Three grooves 1/8 inch wide, 1/8 inch deep and 1/8
inch apart better the appearance and reduce the liability of leakage but
are not necessary. Two holes 2 inches apart are bored in _S_, a strip of
brass 3 x 3/4 x 1/4 inches. Two screws pass through these holes into the
rubber standards _BB_ and hold _S_ firmly in position. The end of _S_ is
bent down at right angles and bored to receive a binding post. A hole is
bored in _S_ halfway between the standards and tapped to receive a
threaded brass rod 2 inches long and 1/4 inch diameter. The lower ends
of the hard rubber standards are each bored and tapped to receive a
screw which fastens them to the base. The electrodes are zinc or brass
cylinders 3/4 inch diameter and 5/8 inch long. The upper electrode is
adjustable by means of a knurled hard rubber head 2 inches diameter and
1/2 inch thick. The lower one is fastened to a brass plate 2 inches
long, 1 inch wide and 1/8 inch thick. One end of the plate is fitted
with a binding post. The base is a piece of hard rubber 5 1/2 x 3 inches
x 3/4 inch.




CHAPTER IX. TRANSMITTING HELIXES.


The transmitting helix or tuning coil supplies the greater part of the
inductance which is so necessary for the production of electrical
oscillations in the transmitting circuit. It consists merely of a few
turns of heavy copper or brass wire wound in a helix around a form. Two
or more movable contacts permit various amounts of the inductance to be
inserted in the open or closed circuits.

The tuning helixes described in this chapter are offered principally to
serve as guides. They have been designed as carefully as possible to
suit the transmitters for which they are recommended.

There are factors, such as the aerial, etc., which vary greatly in
stations of the same rated power and make it best to determine the
length of the helix by actual experiment.

A certain amount of inductance is necessary in the closed circuit for
the production of electrical oscillations and to transfer energy to the
open circuit. Inductance beyond that necessary to receive energy from
the closed circuit lessens the radiation and makes it necessary to
increase the period of the open circuit by adding wires to the aerial.

The open and closed circuits of a tuning helix constitute an oscillation
transformer, and the two circuits if they are very close together or
intertwined are said to be _closely coupled_. When separated or far
apart they are _loosely coupled_.

*Closely Coupled Helix.*Fig. 61 illustrates a closely coupled tuning
helix, suitable for ordinary induction coils giving sparks up to 3 or 4
inches in length.

The heads of the helix are circular pieces of hard wood 1 inch thick and
12 inches in diameter. Six rectangular notches are made at equal
distances along the edges of the heads. Six uprights 3/4 x 1/2 inch and
8 3/4 inches long are fastened in the notches with small round headed
brass screws so that the heads are separated a distance of 6 3/4 inches.
Grooves are cut in the outside face of each of the uprights at a
distance of 7/8 inch apart. The wire forming the helix is 1/4 inch
brass. Brass wire is springy and retains its shape better than copper.
About twenty-two feet will be required. The wire is wound in the grooves
in the uprights and held in place by a few double pointed tacks placed
judiciously. The adjacent turns of wire will then have a separation of
about 5/8 inch.

[Illustration: Fig. 61. Closely Coupled Helix.]

The helix is raised above the level of the operating bench or table by
three small feet fastened to the under head, 120 degrees apart.

[Illustration: *Plate III. Transmitting Circuits.*]

If it is desired to use this helix with the one quarter K.W.
transformer, the diameter of the wire should be increased to 5/16 inch.
The two K.W. transformer will require seven turns of 1/2-inch hard drawn
brass wire two feet in diameter.

[Illustration: Fig. 62. Prague Transmitting Helix.]

When setting up a transmitting station, it is a good plan to coil up a
long piece of the wire to be used on the helix around a rough form. The
adjacent turns should be the same distance apart as they are to be on
the finished instrument. Tune up the station with this improvised helix
and ascertain the amount of inductance required. It is then easy to
design a helix containing the proper amount of wire. Four or five feet
extra should be included to allow plenty of range in case it is ever
necessary to make any changes in the aerial or condenser.

[Illustration: Fig. 63. Closely Coupled Tuning Circuit.]

Plate III illustrates the transmitting circuits of the various
commercial systems. The circuit used will determine the number of
binding posts and movable clips necessary. Fig. 63 gives the diagram of
a very good circuit.

*Loosely Coupled Helix*. The heads of the primary coil of the loosely
coupled helix illustrated in Fig. 64 are circular pieces of hard wood 1
inch thick and 18 inches in diameter. Six uprights 3/4 x 1/2 inch and 11
inches long are set into notches in the upper head and fastened to the
base so that the space between the heads for winding the wire is 10
inches.

[Illustration: Fig. 64. Loosely Coupled Transmitting Helix and Contact
Clip.]

A square wooden pillar 1 1/2 x 1 1/2 inches and 32 inches long passes
through a square hole 1 1/2 x 1 1/2 inches in the center of the heads
and projects 20 inches above the upper one. The heads of the secondary
coil are each 12 inches in diameter. The distance between them is also
12 inches. A square hole 1 1/2 inches x 1 1/2 inches in the center of
each of the heads permits the whole secondary coil to slide up and down
on the pillar. Several 1/4 inch holes bored 1 inch apart in the pillar
admit a small peg of the same diameter. The coupling between the two
coils is varied by changing the height of _S_ above _P_ and inserting
the peg to hold the upper coil in position.

The primary winding of the transformer should consist of about 20 turns
15 inches in diameter, and may range in size of wire from No. 2 to No. 8
B. S. gauge.

The secondary is 10 inches in diameter and will require about 40 turns
of No. 10 to No. 16 B. S. gauge.

The largest sizes of wire are for the one-quarter and one-half K.W.
transformers while the smaller sizes are best suited to small induction
coils.

Fig. 64 also illustrates a clip for making connections to the turns of
the helix. The handle is a piece of hard rubber rod 2 1/2 inches long
and 5/8 inch in diameter. A saw slot 1 inch deep is cut down the center
of one end. Two strips of spring brass 2 inches long, 5/8 inch wide and
3/64 inch thick are bent as shown in the illustration. The straight ends
are slipped in the slot in the handle and clamped together by boring a
hole and passing a machine screw through. The upper end may be fitted
with a nut or a binding post to facilitate connection. Flexible copper
ribbons or stranded wire should be the only conductor used for the
tuning leads.

[Illustration: Fig. 65. Loosely Coupled Transmitting Circuit.]

*Tuning a Transmitter.*Fig. 62 shows a complete wiring diagram of a
transmitter with a hot wire ammeter inserted in the aerial circuit.

To tune such a transmitter place both contacts _A_ and _B_ together on a
turn of wire near the center of the helix. Set the transmitter in
operation by pressing the key and move both contacts together along the
various turns of wire until the meter shows a maximum reading. Then vary
_B_ alone until the reading is still higher. Shifting _A_ varies the
inductance in the closed circuit and _B_ that of the open circuit.

Fig. 65 illustrates the circuit of a loosely coupled transmitter. To
tune such a circuit it is necessary to connect a small needle spark gap
between the aerial and the ground.

[Illustration: Fig. 66. United Wireless Helix, Spark Gap and Condenser.]

A suitable spark gap for this purpose may be made of two darning needles
mounted in double binding posts.

Set the clips, _A_ and _B_, at the center turns of their respective
coils. Press the key to operate the transmitter and adjust the clip,
_A_, until the best spark is obtained in the small needle gap. Then
adjust _B_ until the spark is still better.

If several wires seem to give the same results, move the secondary a
little further away from the primary and try again. After securing the
best spark it is possible to obtain, remove the needle gap, which is
only used in testing. The hot wire ammeter should then be placed in
series with the aerial. By slowly and carefully adjusting the clips and
varying the coupling, the hot wire ammeter will indicate the proper
"tune."

The secondary of the loosely coupled tuning coil produces a "kick back"
effect on the primary, due to induction, and unless the two coils are
somewhat separated, the wave emitted from the transmitter will have more
than one "hump" and a person receiving the wave will be able to tune it
in on two places on his tuning coil.

A loosely coupled tuning coil does not radiate so much energy as a
closely coupled helix, but will, when properly tuned, emit a wave which
is not so highly damped. Therefore as far as distance is concerned the
loosely coupled type is perhaps the most efficient.




CHAPTER X. KEYS.


THE keys used in wireless work differ from those used in commercial wire
telegraphy in being much heavier and stronger, so as to conduct and
break the heavier currents without heating. Where very powerful currents
must be broken the contacts of the key usually operate under oil or in
the magnetic field of a pair of electromagnets. In other cases a small
key is used to operate a heavy relay. In the former type a metal arm
projects downward from the lever of an ordinary Morse telegraph key into
a compartment filled with oil. The arm is provided with a platinum point
which makes contact with another similar point on the bottom of the
compartment, so that the break is made under oil and the key remains
cool and does not arc. In the second form the same result is
accomplished by a magnetic "blowout." The "blowout" is merely an
electromagnet connected in series with the key and its poles at right
angles to the contacts of the key. When the circuit is broken the
magnetic field extinguishes the arc which tends to form between the
contacts of the key.

An ordinary Morse key may be used with coils operated on batteries if
they do not give more than a four-inch spark. Larger coils or
transformers, especially if they are operated on the 110-volt current,
require a heavier key. Where an ordinary Morse key is used with a 3-inch
or 4-inch coil it is a very good plan to provide an auxiliary conductor,
one end of which is fastened to the metal base and the other end to the
adjusting screw on the back of the lever. A piece of flexible lamp cord
is suitable for this purpose. This precaution saves the pivots of the
key from heating and possible burning by heavy currents.

[Illustration: Fig. 67. Morse Key fitted with Extension Lever.]

The most convenient method is to fit up an old Morse key in the manner
shown in Fig. 67. The lever is extended by a piece of aluminum or brass
6 inches long and 5/16 inch thick. The exact shape and the dimensions
are indicated in the illustration.

The extension lever is provided with a 1/2-inch round brass or nickel
steel contact 7/8 inch long. The lower end of the contact is bored and
tapped to receive a short machine screw. The other contact is a similar
piece projecting downwards from a small arm fastened to the top of a
standard 1/2 inch diameter and 2 inches long. The arm is a strip of
brass 1/2 inch wide, 1/4 inch thick, and 1 1/2 inches long, fastened to
the top of the standard with a machine screw. The brass standard is held
in an upright position by means of a small machine screw which passes
through the base. A wire connects with this screw to a heavy binding
post mounted on the base. Connection is made with contact on the
extension lever by means of a piece of heavy flexible lamp cord, which
also runs to a binding post mounted on the base. The contact is
insulated from the extension lever by means of two mica insulating
washers and a bushing. Avoid running the connection to the base of the
key so that the current must pass through the bearings. The contacts
should be filed until they are perfectly flat and square across and make
contact over their entire surface. When carefully constructed a key of
this type will carry without heating almost any currents in reach of the
amateur operator and which his induction coil or transformer will stand.

[Illustration: Fig. 68. Wireless Key.]

The plans and dimensions for a heavier key are shown in Fig. 68. A
wooden pattern of the base and bearings is made and taken to a brass
foundry where a casting in brass may be secured. The pattern should be
of the same shape and size as the finished article represented in the
figure. It is given a slight taper so that it may be easily withdrawn
from the sand mold. The brass casting is finished up square and smooth
by grinding on an emery wheel or by careful filing. The lever is a piece
of brass rod 1/2 inch square and 6 1/2 inches long. One end is fitted
with an ordinary hard rubber Morse key knob. The knurled nuts and
thumbscrews are of the same size as those used on an ordinary key, and
may be purchased from an electrical supply house.

[Illustration: Fig. 69. "United Wireless Type Key."]

The pivot is a piece of 3/16 inch round steel 1 inch long, and passes
through the lever 1 1/2 inches from the rear end. The ends are ground or
turned to sharp points and rest in bearings formed by boring a recess in
the ends of the thumbscrews. The thumbscrews pass through the center of
the bearing, standards 3/4 inch above the base. The lever is clamped to
the center of the pivot by means of a small machine screw. A heavy piece
of spring brass, _S_, 1/2 inch wide and 3 inches long, is fastened to
the base at one end with a short 8-32 screw. The other end is bent
upward so that it presses hard against the lower end of an adjusting
screw, which passes through the lever 1 1/4 inches forward of the pivot.
This spring serves as an auxiliary conductor and saves the key from
carrying an excessive current through its bearings. By adjusting the
thumbscrew, the tension of the key may be regulated to suit the
operator. The contacts of the key are 1/8-inch round nickel steel alloy
or pure silver, set in short 1/4-inch machine screws which fit into
correspondingly threaded holes in the base and the lever. This makes the
contacts easily removable for renewal. The lower contact is set in a
longer screw than the upper one so that connection may be made to it. It
is insulated from the base by a hard rubber brushing.

The contacts must be directly above one another and in perfect alignment
or else they will pit and stick.




CHAPTER XI. AERIAL SWITCHES AND ANCHOR GAPS.


Some form of switch for quickly connecting the aerial and ground to
either the transmitting or receiving apparatus is necessary.

Low powered stations using an induction coil as a transmitter will find
a 250-volt double pole, double throw porcelain base switch to be
suitable. Such a switch is connected up according to the diagram shown
in Fig. 70. As clearly illustrated, the receiving apparatus is in use
when the switch is thrown to the right, and the transmitter is ready for
operation when the switch is in the left-hand position. The ease and
speed with which such a switch may be thrown from right to left or vice
versa may be much facilitated by fitting it with a larger and longer
handle than the one usually provided.

[Illustration: Fig. 70. Connections for Aerial Switch.]

An ordinary double pole, double throw switch should be mounted on the
wall within easy reach of the operator, while the two types of switch
about to be described are best situated directly on the operating table
alongside of the transmitting key.

All insulated parts of an aerial switch such as the base, insulating
bar, handle, etc., should be made of some good insulating material, as
porcelain, hard rubber or ebonite. All insulation which is used in power
switches such as slate, wood, marble, etc., is worthless and should not
be used.

If a loop aerial system is used, a switch is necessary, which will break
the primary transmitting current so that in case of an accidental touch
of the key while receiving, the high voltage discharge will not pass
across the anchor gap into the receptor and badly damage the same or
shock the operator. The connections of such a switch and the loop aerial
are shown in the wiring diagram of the De Forest system.

[Illustration: Fig. 71. Aerial Switches.]

A switch may be easily constructed from a 50 ampere, single throw,
triple pole, fuseless power switch. If it is mounted on a slate base
remove it and set it up on a base of the same size made of fiber or
porcelain. Flat unglazed tiles of various sizes are obtainable from tile
setters at a very low cost. They may be easily bored with an ordinary
steel twist drill. Such tiles are excellent insulators when not exposed
to moisture and are useful for bases, etc., in many cases. A heavy coat
of shellac varnish will make the tile impervious to moisture.

A hard rubber rod, _S_, 3 inches long and 5/8 inch diameter, is mounted
on both sides of the base in alignment with the contacts. A strip of
hard rubber, _Y_, 1 inch wide, 1/2 inch thick and 6 1/2 inches long is
fitted with two contacts similar to those mounted on the base of the
switch. The contacts are mounted at a distance apart equal to the
distance between the outside knife blades of the switch. A 1/8-inch hole
is bored through the strip at both ends, through the axis of the rods
along their entire length and through the base. A piece of brass rod 4
inches long and threaded at both ends with an 8-32 die is passed through
the holes and yoke, so that the rods may be held firmly to the base and
the strip to the tops of the rods by two nuts screwed on the ends of the
brass rod.

[Illustration: Fig. 72. Detail of Contacts.]

The upper contacts should be directly over the two outside lower ones.
They are made from a strip of brass 1/2 inch wide, 3 1/2 inches long and
1/16 inch thick (bent as in Fig. 72). A binding post is mounted on the
yoke directly above and connecting with each one of the contacts.

The middle pole of the switch is connected to the primary of the coil or
transformer, so that when the switch is down, the primary circuit is
completed, and when it is up it is broken.

[Illustration: Fig. 73. Details of Switch Parts.]

Some may prefer to make the complete switch, and in that case the
dimensions given in Fig. 73 may be of aid. The knife blades are 6 inches
long, 5/8 inch wide and 1/8 inch thick. Three are required. A 1/8-inch
hole is bored 3/8 inch from one end, and the other end is cut out in the
shape shown in the illustration. An insulating bar 5 x 3/4 x 5/8 inches
is made of hard rubber and three notches are cut in the back face, one
directly in the center and one 2 inches on either side.

[Illustration: Fig. 74. Method of Fastening Knife.]

Three 1/8-inch holes are bored one in the center of each groove and at
right angles to it. An 8-32 machine screw 3/4 inch long is placed in the
notch in the end of the knife blade and the screw passed through the
hole in the insulating bar. The blade may then be clamped tightly in
place by putting a nut on the end of the screw. The screw which holds
the middle knife blade in place is longer than the other two so that a
handle may be fitted on.

The bearings are made the same size and shape as the contacts
illustrated in Fig. 72, with the exception that a 1/8-inch hole is bored
through near the top so that a small bolt may be slipped in to hold the
knife blades in place.

The base of the switch measures 8 x 9 x 3/4 inches. The parts are
assembled as in Fig. 71.

Another type of aerial switch called a "T" switch is illustrated in the
same figure. A piece of 3/4-inch hard rubber is sawed in the shape of a
T, 3 1/2 inches high and 6 1/2 inches wide at the top. The upper
contacts are mounted on arms of the "T" and connected to binding posts
placed immediately above them, A slot, 1/2 inch wide and 3 inches long,
sawed in the center of the leg of the T, permits the middle knife blade
to move without obstruction.

[Illustration: Fig. 75. "T" Aerial Switch.]

A double pole, double throw switch may be easily adapted to form a "T"
switch. Two knives are cut from sheet brass, of the same shape as those
already on the switch but twice as long. The contacts at one end of the
porcelain base are removed and the bearings of the knife blade fastened
there in their stead. This forms a single throw, double pole switch
having knife blades twice the length of the original double pole, double
throw switch. A "T" shaped support for the upper contacts may be sawed
out of 1/2-inch hard rubber and smoothed up with a file. The support is
fastened upright by means of two screws which pass through holes in the
center of the base where the knife bearings originally were. The two
contacts which were removed from the base are fastened to the support
directly over the knife blades so that they make a good contact when the
switch is up. Two binding posts mounted above the contacts make
connection with them.

If desirable the switch may be fitted with a third knife blade and
contact so that when the switch is up in position for receiving, the
primary circuit of the induction coil or small transformer is open.

It is obvious that the dimensions, etc., need not be the same as those
given here but may be adapted to suit the size and design of the switch
which is to be altered. The knives should always be as long as
convenient and the contacts separated by a wide space.

[Illustration: Fig. 76. "United" Wireless Lightning Switch.]

[Illustration: Fig. 77. Shoemaker Tuning Coil and Aerial Switch.]

Figs. 76 and 77 illustrate the aerial switches used in the installations
of the United Wireless Telegraph Company. These illustrations give a
good idea of the long knife blades employed. The lightning switch is
fitted with a micrometer spark gap on top of the switch which is in
service when the handle is up. The small spark gap affords a path for
the lightning to jump into the ground, but cannot be bridged by the
receiving currents.

*Anchor Gaps.*When a loop aerial system is employed for both
transmitting and receiving, a device known as an anchor gap becomes
necessary.

[Illustration: Fig. 78. "United" Wireless Anchor Gaps.]

The construction and connection of a simple anchor gap are shown in Fig.
79. A ring 1 3/4 inches outside and 1 1/4 inches inside is cut out of
5/8-inch hard rubber or fiber and smoothed up. Three 1/8-inch holes are
bored in the periphery of the ring at 120 degrees to each other. The
holes are threaded with a 10-24 tap. Three small binding posts are each
fitted with a 3/16-inch brass rod 7/8 inch long, having a 10-24 thread
so that they may be screwed into the holes in the ring.

[Illustration: Fig. 79. Anchor Gap.]

The gap between the ends of the two rods connected to the aerial and the
receiving apparatus is adjusted until it is about 1/8 inch long. The
third point is screwed in until it all but touches the other two.




CHAPTER XII. HOT WIRE AMMETER.


When a current passes through a conductor, it generates heat in
proportion to the resistance offered and the amount of current flowing.
Heat causes metals to expand sufficiently so that these two properties
may be applied to the construction of a hot wire ammeter for the
measurement of alternating currents of high frequency and potential.

The hot wire ammeter is placed in series with the aerial, so that by
noting the deflection of the pointer, the inductance, capacity and spark
gap may be adjusted until the meter gives a maximum reading.

[Illustration: Fig. 80. Simple Hot Wire Meter.]

A simple and crude form of meter which is sufficiently sensitive for
most experimental work is illustrated in Fig. 80. A piece of No. 36 B.
S. platinum wire is sealed in the bulb of an ordinary air thermometer.
When the wire becomes heated by a passing current of electricity, it
causes the air in the bulb to expand and change the height of the
colored liquid in the tube.

An air-thermometer is simply a glass tube of fine bore having a bulb
blown at the upper end and the free end immersed in a reservoir of ink
or some other colored liquid. The instrument is put in working order by
grasping the bulb in the palm of the hand, so that the warmth of the
hand will expand the air and cause some of it to escape from the lower
end of the tube. Upon removing the hand, the air will contract and suck
some of the liquid up into the tube. It should rise only about half way
to the bulb, and the tube should be about 18 inches long so as to leave
room for changes in the position of the column due to variations in the
outside atmosphere. A cardboard scale graduated in inches and reading
downward is fastened in back of the tube.

The tube should have a fine bore so as to make the instrument as
sensitive as possible. The best liquid to use is alcohol, colored with a
little aniline dye. Alcohol has a lower specific gravity than water, and
the column will be more sensitive to small changes of pressure. The same
figure shows a form of meter devised and used with success by the
author.

Two tubes are fitted to the bulb, a large one having a bore of about 0.1
of an inch and another about 0.04 inch. Connection is established by the
aid of two corks and a short length of glass tubing one inch in
diameter. The tubes are bent U shaped, and a little colored alcohol is
placed in each, so that the bottle reservoir is unnecessary. The tube of
large bore is fitted at the top with an ordinary glass stopcock such as
that used in chemical laboratories.

The stopcock is left open and the transmitter is set in operation by
holding down the key. The helix, etc., are adjusted until the larger
tube shows a maximum reading. The stop-cock is then closed and the
instruments further adjusted by noting the reading in the finer tube
which corresponds to much smaller changes in current. The finer bore
cannot at first be used alone because the large changes of current would
blow the liquid out of the tube. In lieu of a glass stopcock, a piece of
rubber tubing may be placed over the end of the tube and closed, when
necessary, with a pinch cock.

[Illustration: Fig. 81. Meter with Case Removed.]

Fig. 81 shows a more elaborate and sensitive form of meter which is not
only suitable for experimental outfits but may be used with good results
for more careful work. The advantage of the form of meter here described
is that it is "pivotless" so to speak, and contains no bearings which
require jewels to eliminate friction.

The "hot wire" is platinum, and in order to compensate for external
changes of the atmospheric temperature, is mounted on a strip of glass.
Glass and platinum expand at nearly the same rate, and the wire is thus
kept taut and prevented from changing the position of the pointer except
when the current passes.

[Illustration: Fig. 82. Glass Compensating Strip.]

Drill four 1/8-inch holes in a piece of window glass 6 inches long and 1
inch wide. The location of the holes is shown in Fig. 82. The two at the
ends serve to mount the standards, _A_ and _B_, and those at the center
to fasten down the strip to the base. The holes are drilled with a small
three-cornered file which has been broken off and set in a breast drill.
The broken end should be used to drill the glass and be kept thoroughly
lubricated with camphor and turpentine. With a little care and patience
the holes may be drilled without breaking the glass.

[Illustration: Fig. 83. Details of "Hot Wire" Supports.]

Two brass standards are fastened on each end of the glass. They are bent
out of sheet brass and are 3/4 inch high and 3/8 inch wide. A brass
spring of the same width and 1 1/4 inches long is clamped under one
standard. The standard which holds the spring in position is tapped for
a small thumbscrew which may be secured from a binding post. Solder a
small brass pin to the top of the spring and another one to the top of
the standard which is fastened at the opposite end of the glass strip.
Some paper or rubber washers must be placed between the feet of the
standards and the glass strip to prevent it from cracking when the
screws are tightened.

For a station up to one-half K.W. in power the hot wire must be No. 40
B. S. gauge platinum. For larger stations a single No. 36 wire may be
used or three No. 40 wires in parallel. The wire must be about 7 inches
long. Stretch it between the standard, _A_, and the spring, _C_. Wrap
the ends around the pins and solder them there, using as small amount of
solder as possible. The tension of the wire, which should be taut, is
adjusted with the thumbscrew.

Take a piece of the platinum wire about 1/2 inch long and make a little
eyelet at one end. Wrap the straight end around the center of the long
hot wire and tie a piece of silk in the eyelet.

[Illustration: Fig. 84. Details of Movement.]

The glass strip and its standards supporting the hot wire may then be
fastened to the baseboard of the instrument by means of two round headed
brass wood screws. Two rubber washers must be interposed between the
glass and the wood. A piece of 3/32 inch brass 1/2 inch wide and 3 1/4
inches long is bent in the shape shown by _F_ in Fig. 84. The upper end
is bored and tapped to receive a thumbscrew similar to the one in the
standard on the glass strip. Two brass springs 1/64 inch thick, 3/8 inch
wide and 1 1/4 inches long are soldered or riveted at opposite ends of
_F_ in the positions shown in Fig. 85. The springs should project one
inch from the upright. A small hook made from an ordinary pin is
soldered to the outside end of each.

[Illustration: Fig. 85. Complete Movement.]

The movement is shown in perspective by Fig. 85. _G_ is a rectangle of
very thin copper, 1/2 inch long and 1/4 inch wide, having a little
projection 1/4 inch long bent in a curve so that it forms a sextant of a
circle, of which the intersection of the diagonals of _G_ would be the
center.

The pointer is a piece of steel wire 5 inches long. It is slightly
flattened by hammering so that it will retain its shape and not curl.
About 1/2 inch is allowed to project through _G_ and is weighted with a
lead shot so as to partly counterbalance its weight.

Two loops of wire are fastened to the corners of _G_ by tying them in
holes which are bored there for that purpose. The wire is fine phosphor
bronze .003-.005 of an inch in diameter, which is used for suspending
the movements of delicate galvanometers. Pass the loops over the hooks
on the springs and adjust until the pointer moves horizontally. Then
fasten the wires permanently to the hooks by means of a small drop of
solder.

[Illustration: Fig. 86. Side View of Hot Wire and Movement.]

The movement is mounted in the position shown by Fig. 86. The silk
thread tied to the eyelet runs to the little sextant and is cemented at
the further end by means of a small drop of sealing wax. The scale is a
piece of sheet copper or brass, covered with white paper and calibrated
in degrees or made to read in amperes by connecting it in series with an
ammeter and a source of direct current. A rheostat should be included in
the circuit and the current varied so that various values may be marked
off. All the different points must be located by sending an actual
current of that value through the meter. An error is liable to result if
any of the points are marked by guesswork, for the divisions grow
smaller and smaller as they become farther away from zero. For example a
position of the pointer corresponding to 0.1 of an ampere will not be
half way between zero and 0.2 but will be nearer the 0.2 division.

The resistance of wires to high frequency currents is much higher than
their resistance to constant currents. This would seem at first to
indicate that our meter will give a higher reading for an equal current
value, when used with a high frequency current after being calibrated
with a direct current. But with wires of very small diameter such as No.
40 B. S. gauge there is almost no perceptible difference and
consequently no error unless the frequency of the oscillations exceeds
1,000,000 per second, which is very unlikely with the "spark" method of
wireless telegraphy.

Fig. 87 illustrates the form of hot wire ammeter used by the United
Wireless Telegraph Co. for tuning their installations.

[Illustration: Fig. 87. United Wireless Hot Wire Ammeter.]

The pivotless meter just described should be fitted with heavy binding
posts which are connected to the brass standards mounted on the glass
strip by means of stranded copper wire.

The meter should be fitted with a case and glass cover to exclude dust
and prevent injury to the working parts. It should be mounted in such a
position that the weight of the pointer is sufficient to keep the silk
thread taut so that when the wire expands the pointer which is normally
at zero will fall of its own weight. When the wire cools after the
current has ceased to flow, it will contract and draw the pointer up
again.

Platinum wire will give good results, but for more accurate work an
alloy known as platinoid is most suitable.

Detailed instructions for tuning the transmitting circuits by means of a
hot wire ammeter are given in the chapter on Transmitting Helixes.




CHAPTER XIII. OSCILLATION DETECTORS.



"UNIVERSAL" DETECTOR.


The purpose and position of the detector in a wireless telegraph system
has already received some notice in the first chapter, but its operation
and adjustment are so important that this chapter deserves the most
careful consideration. The receiving range of a station is not as much
dependent upon the aerial system as it is upon the adjustment of the
tuning circuits and the detector itself.

It is suggested that the amateur experimenter not confine his work to
receiving only with a single type of detector but rather accustom
himself to the different instruments.

During the past few years many wireless telegraph detectors have been
invented which lend themselves readily to amateur construction. It is
somewhat of a convenience to have a "universal" detector which with a
little manipulation may be used as more than one type and thus save
unnecessary expense and much labor.

The "universal" detector shown in Fig. 88 has been so designed as to
present a good appearance and at the same time be successfully operated
as an electrolytic, tantalum, peroxide of lead, silicon, carborundum or
any of the crystal type detectors.

[Illustration: Fig. 88. Universal Detector.]

[Illustration: Fig. 89. Details of Universal Detector.]

The standard, _R_, is a 3/4-inch hard rubber rod, 1 1/4 inches long,
with a 3/16 inch hole bored through its axis. A spring, _S_, is made
after the plan shown in Fig. 86. It is 2 inches long and 1/16 inch
thick. A brass collar 1/8 inch thick and 3/8 inch diameter is soldered
on the smaller end of the spring in order to so reenforce it that it may
be bored and threaded with an 8-32 tap to receive a thumbscrew. The
brass standard, _D_, is a small cylinder 3/8 inch high and 1/2 inch in
diameter. A 3/16 inch hole is bored through its axis. The arm, _A_, is
brass and measures 1 1/2 x 1/2 x 1/4 inches. The ends are rounded by
filing or grinding so that they coincide with the semi-circumference of
a circle having a diameter of 1/2 inch. Two holes are bored on the
center line 1/4 inch from each end.

One is a 1/8-inch hole and the other is threaded with a 10-32 tap to fit
the large adjusting screw. The adjusting screw, _H_, is 1 1/4 inches
long and has a 10-32 thread. A hard rubber head 1 inch thick and 1 1/4
inches in diameter is clamped to the upper end by means of two hexagonal
brass nuts. A small brass washer should be placed between the head and
each of the nuts to give it a more finished appearance and prevent the
nuts from marring the rubber.

[Illustration: Fig. 90. Parts of Universal Detector.]

The brass bed plate, _B_, is 1/8 inch thick, 3 inches long and 2 inches
wide. Two holes are drilled on the center line 9/16 inch and 7/8 inch
from either end. One is 3/8 inch in diameter and the other is threaded
with an 8-32 tap. An insulating bushing in the shape of a hard rubber
washer on the lower end of _R_, 1/8 inch thick and 3/8 inch in diameter,
has a 3/16-inch hole bored in its center and is fitted in the larger
hole in the bedplate. The whole detector is assembled and mounted on a
hard rubber base 4 x 5 x 4 inches. A brass binding rod, _M_, 3 1/4
inches long and having an 8-32 thread, is passed successively through
the arm, the brass standard, the spring, the hard rubber standard and
the bedplate. A hexagonal brass nut on the under side of the base and a
thumb nut on the brass arm serves to bind the whole tightly together.
Four binding posts are mounted on the four corners of the base. Two are
connected to the brass binding rod and two to the bedplate. This
completes the universal part of the detector. The remaining parts are
each described under the headings of the respective detectors to which
they belong.



ELECTROLYTIC DETECTORS.


*"Bare Point" Type.*Although the electrolytic is the oldest of a long
line of very sensitive detectors, it still holds first rank when in the
hands of an experienced and skillful operator. It exists in two
different forms, but the more favored is that known as the Fessenden
"bare point" type, which consists of a very fine Woolaston platinum wire
(.001-.00002 of an inch in diameter) dipping in a small cup of dilute
acid. The acid is either 20 per cent chemically pure nitric or
sulphuric.

[Illustration: Fig. 91. Bare Point Electrolytic Detector.]

A large electrode of platinum wire or foil dips into or is sealed in the
bottom of the cup so as to make an electrical connection with the
liquid. The fine Woolaston wire is clamped over the cup in a holder
which permits of vertical adjustment, by means of a thumbscrew, so that
the depth of immersion in the acid may be regulated.

[Illustration: Fig. 92. Effect of Exposing too much Wire.]

Woolaston wire is covered with a comparatively thick coating of silver,
which before using must be removed from the end for about 1/32 inch by
dipping it in strong nitric acid, which will dissolve the silver and
expose the almost invisible platinum core. Too much of the fine platinum
core must not be exposed or else the surface tension of the acid will
cause the wire to curl over and present a large flat surface instead of
a fine point. This is a very necessary and important precaution, for the
detector is more sensitive as the area of contact between the fine wire
and the liquid is smaller.

Whenever this condition is reached the end of the wire should be cut off
with a pair of sharp scissors and a new point exposed.

[Illustration: Fig. 93. Electrolytic Detector Circuits.]

The detector circuit is shown in Fig. 93. The fine "bare point" is
always made the positive or anode of the battery circuit. Otherwise the
detector will not operate. A potentiometer must be shunted across the
terminals of the battery to reduce the voltage to a value just below
that which is required to break down the thin film of oxygen gas which
collects on the "bare point" and polarizes it or insulates it from the
liquid so that little or no battery current can flow. This film of gas
is caused by the electrolysis of the acid solution and the decomposition
of the water into hydrogen and oxygen gas.

When oscillations are set up in the receiving aerial and they surge
through the detector, a sufficient e.m.f. is generated to break down the
film of gas and permit the battery current to flow again. The passage of
current causes the signals in the telephone receivers.

The electrolytic cup for the universal detector is illustrated in Fig.
90. It is made of a piece of hard rubber rod 3/4 inch in diameter and
3/4 inch high. A recess 1/2 inch in diameter and 3/8 inch deep is cut in
the top to contain the acid. A small hole 1/4 inch deep is bored in the
under side and threaded with an 8-32 tap. A brass pin 1/2 inch long,
having a corresponding thread, is fitted in the hole. The pin may then
be screwed into the small hole in the bedplate. A piece of No. 30 B. S.
gauge platinum wire or a strip of platinum foil is clamped between the
bottom of the cup and the bedplate and then bent over the top of the cup
into the liquid.

[Illustration: Fig. 94. Electrolytic Detector.]

A 1/16-inch hole 1/4 inch deep is bored in the lower end of a thumbscrew
having an 8-32 thread. A piece of Woolaston wire 1/2 inch long is placed
in the center of the hole and tinfoil packed into the surrounding space
with the head of a sewing needle until the wire is held firmly in
position. The free end of the wire must then be dipped in some strong
nitric acid to remove the silver. The thumbscrew is placed in the collar
on the end of the spring of the universal detector and lowered until the
"bare point" almost touches the surface of the electrolyte in the cup
beneath. Pressure must then be applied to the spring by turning the
large adjusting screw until the "bare point" touches the liquid and a
click is heard in the telephone receivers and a faint bubbling sound is
also audible. The adjusting screw must then be slowly and carefully
turned in the opposite direction so as to raise the point until the
bubbling changes to a hissing sound. The point is then above the level
of the electrolyte in the cup but is still in contact with it because of
the capillary action of the fine wire and the liquid.

By using the large adjusting screw as much as possible, instead of the
small thumbscrew, the point is raised or lowered without giving it a
circular motion and much finer adjustment is made possible. The
potentiometer is adjusted until the hissing noise caused by excessive
battery voltage just disappears. The detector is then in its most
sensitive condition for receiving signals.

When the detector is in use for long periods, the potentiometer must be
frequently readjusted to compensate the gradual loss in voltage of the
battery. It is well to provide a small switch which will disconnect the
battery from the potentiometer when the detector is not in use. In the
same case the acid should be removed and placed in a tightly stoppered
bottle. A pipette or fountain pen filler furnishes the most convenient
means for filling or emptying the cup. The acid must be kept perfectly
pure and out of contact with all metals other than platinum. Great care
should be exercised in filling the cup, for the acid, if spilled, will
not only badly corrode the metal fittings, but will also provide a
current leak and seriously weaken the signals.

*Shoemaker and Stone Detectors.*These two types of detectors make use
of "glass points," so called because the fine platinum wire is sealed in
a glass tube and the end of the tube is then ground down on a fine
oilstone until the platinum wire is exposed. This results in a very fine
contact area and insures constant immersion of the point without
readjustment.

[Illustration: Fig. 95. Forming "Glass" Point.]

The fine platinum wire for a glass point may be secured from one of the
flaming pocket cigar lighters making use of spongy platinum. The center
of a thick walled glass tube is softened by heat and contracted as shown
at _A-B_ in Fig. 95. After cooling, the tube is cut in half at the point
indicated by the dotted line. The platinum wire is placed in the
contracted end of the tube and carefully fused in so that about one-half
of the wire, which is about 1/2 inch long, is embedded in the glass. The
contracted end of the tube containing the wire should be closed.
Connection is established to the upper end of the fine platinum wire by
filling the tube with mercury and dipping a piece of flexible conductor
in the mercury. The upper end of the tube is closed and the mercury
prevented from escaping by a small dab of sealing wax.

The "point" is slowly and carefully rubbed on a fine oilstone kept well
wet with water. The tube must be held in a vertical position so that the
glass will be ground away at right angles. When it is thought that the
platinum wire has been exposed by the grinding, connect the flexible
conductor to one pole of a battery. The other pole of the battery is
connected to a pair of sensitive telephone receivers and the telephone
receivers to a vessel containing dilute acid. If the platinum wire is
exposed, a sharp click will be heard in the telephone receivers when the
"point" is dipped in the acid. Do not confuse the sharp click with the
sound which may be occasioned because the outside of the glass tube is
damp or wet.

After the point has been sufficiently ground, disconnect the testing
apparatus and connect the free end of the flexible conductor to a
binding post placed on the end of the detector spring, _S_. The detector
circuit is similar to that of the "bare point" type.

[Illustration: Fig. 96. Shoemaker Detector.]

The illustration shows what is sometimes called a "primary cell"
detector because it furnishes its own current and does not require a
battery. A Stone detector may be very easily changed to one of the
Shoemaker type by substituting an amalgamated zinc rod for the platinum
wire anode which makes connection with the liquid in the cup. This
combination of platinum and zinc results in an electromotive force of
about 0.7 volt, and the telephone receivers are connected directly to
the terminals of the detector without any local battery or
potentiometer. The electrolyte in the cup must be a 20 per cent solution
of pure sulphuric acid, as nitric acid would dissolve the zinc in a very
few minutes. The zinc must be kept well amalgamated with mercury.

[Illustration: Fig. 97. Shoemaker Detector Circuits.]

The Shoemaker system makes use of a loop aerial, and the circuits with a
single and double coil tuner are illustrated in Fig. 97. It is not
necessary to use these, and the detector will operate just exactly as
well on a "straightaway" aerial.

*Lamp Detector.*All electrolytic detectors, more especially those of
the "glass point" type, are subject to the annoyance of "burn-outs."
That is, the fine platinum wire melts when receiving strong signals from
a near-by station.

In such case, the "bare point" must be lowered until it again makes
contact with the liquid, and the "glass point" reground until the wire
is again exposed.

When this trouble comes often it is very convenient to have at hand a
simple detector which will not burn out and which may be substituted for
the usual one when great sensitiveness is not required.

[Illustration: Fig. 98. Lamp Detector.]

Such an instrument is made by snipping off the tip of a small
incandescent electric lamp and removing the filament with a wire. One of
the leading-in wires is broken off as close as possible to the glass
stub and the globe half filled with a 20 per cent acid solution. The
broken wire must be made the negative or cathode and connected like a
Fessenden or Stone detector. This lamp detector though crude will give
good service without burning out when used to receive from near-by
stations.

In place of a lamp detector, a glass point having a larger wire than
that of the cigar lighter may be used instead of the usual point, but it
will not be so sensitive.

Fig. 99 illustrates a simple form of electrolytic detector which is not
so sensitive as that shown in Fig. 100 but is still very serviceable.

The cup is made from the carbon of an old dry cell, the brass connecting
cap serving very well to make the connections to. It has a recess about
1/2 inch in diameter and 1/4 inch deep cut in the top to contain the
electrolyte. The cup should be about one inch high. A file will smooth
up any rough edges and give it a good appearance.

[Illustration: Fig. 99. Simple Electrolytic Detector.]

The yoke is made of a piece of 1/8-inch sheet brass about 3/4 inch wide,
bent in the shape shown in the illustration. Two small holes are drilled
in the feet, to serve to fasten the yoke firmly to the base and also to
make connection to.

The adjusting screw may be made from the screw taken from the carbon of
an old dry cell. To permit of accurate adjustment, it should be fitted
with a large head made from a piece of 1/4-inch hard rubber or fiber cut
in a circle about 1 1/4 inches in diameter. Bore a small hole about 1/8
inch in diameter through the center of the head and force it on the
screw. A nut screwed on the under side will then clamp it tightly
against the brass head. A hole is bored in the center of the yoke and a
battery nut which will fit the adjusting screw soldered directly under
it.

The platinum wire may be either soldered to the adjusting screw or
fastened with tinfoil in the method which has been described.

The cup and yoke are best mounted on a piece of hard rubber 1/2 inch
thick, 3 inches wide and 4 inches long. A binding post is placed near
each of the four corners.

It is possible to do extremely fine and long distance work with the
detector illustrated in Fig. 100. It is so arranged that the "bare
point" need not necessarily be revolved when making an adjustment, and
so it is possible to place it in a very sensitive condition.

A brass standard, _U_, 1 1/4 inches long is cut from a piece of 1/2-inch
rod. A hole bored in the top and bottom of the standard is threaded with
an 8-32 tap. A brass rod, _R_, 2 inches long is threaded with an 8-32
die throughout its entire length. One end is screwed in the top of _U_.

A piece of brass tubing, _P_, 1 1/4 inches long and having an internal
bore of 1/2 inch is slipped over _U_. A slot cut in _P_ fits over a
small pin set in _U_ and permits _P_ to be slid up and down but not to
turn around.

[Illustration: Fig. 100. Electrolytic Detector.]

A head in the form of a circular brass washer, _E_, 1/8 inch thick, 1/2
inch in diameter and having a 5/32-inch hole bored in the center is
soldered in the top of the tube, _P_.

A circular piece of hard rubber, _H_, 2 inches in diameter and 1/2 inch
thick is fitted with a brass bushing having a hole in the center with an
8-32 thread to screw on the rod, _R_.

A spiral spring is placed around _R_ between _U_ and the head _E_. A
small brass washer should be placed between _H_ and _E_ in order to
eliminate friction. When _H_ is turned in one direction, the spring will
cause _P_ to rise, and when turned in the other direction it will be
lowered.

A brass arm, _A_, 1/4 x 1/4 x 1 1/2 inches carries a small thumbscrew,
_r_, at one end, while the other end is soldered to _P_ as shown in Fig.
96. The Woolaston wire is soldered to _T_.

[Illustration: Fig. 101. Details of Electrolytic Detector.]

A small carbon cup 3/4 x 3/4 inch serves to hold the electrolyte. A
3/8-inch hole is bored 1/4 inch deep in the bottom of the cup and poured
full of melted lead. The lead is then bored and tapped to fit a machine
screw which fastens the cup to the base. Connection is made from a
binding post to the machine screw. A second binding post is connected to
the screw which fits into the bottom of _U_ and holds it to the base.

If desirable a circular piece of hard wood, _F_, may be turned out and
glued to the base around the cup in order to give it a more finished
appearance.

The thumbscrew, _T_, is used to lower the "bare point" until it almost
touches the liquid, and then the large head, _H_, is brought into play
to make the finer adjustment.

*Increasing the Sensitiveness of an Electrolytic Detector.* The
sensitiveness of an electrolytic detector may be increased in three
ways, viz., by connecting two detectors in series, by warming the
electrolyte and by agitating it.

The first method is clearly apparent.

The second is accomplished by placing the detector over a sand bath and
gently warming it. It will then show a marked increase in the strength
of the signals at a temperature of about 30 C. This increase will
continue to rise with the temperature until it reaches a maximum at
about 60 C.

[Illustration: Fig. 102. Increasing the Sensitiveness of an Electrolytic
Detector.]

Branly discovered that a fine stream of gas passed through the
electrolyte in order to agitate it increases the strength of the signals
in the phones. He devised a detector provided with two extra platinum
terminals sealed in the cup. When connected in series with a battery and
an adjustable resistance, these terminals cause electrolysis of the
water, and a fine stream of oxygen and hydrogen gas flows through the
acid electrolyte. The stream of gas agitates the liquid just
sufficiently so that when oscillations strike the detector they augment
the breaking down of the film of gas which collects on the fine platinum
point. This results in an increase in the battery current flowing
through the telephone receivers of from two to four times and a
corresponding increase in the volume of sound. The adjustable resistance
is used to regulate the decomposition of the electrolyte and formation
of gas, for if this proceeds too rapidly an undesirable rumbling noise
will be produced in the telephone receivers.



TANTALUM DETECTOR.


The tantalum detector is especially suitable for the amateur
experimenter because its change in resistance when struck by
oscillations is so great that high resistance telephone receivers are
not necessary. Its normal resistance is about 1000-2000 ohms, and this
sometimes drops as low as 125-100 ohms when struck by oscillations of
ordinary strength. It is not nearly so sensitive as the electrolytic or
crystal detectors, but gives very much louder tones in the telephone
receivers when used for short distance work.

[Illustration: Fig. 103. Tantalum Detector.]

The detector is easily made by substituting a piece of tantalum wire for
the Woolaston wire of an ordinary electrolytic detector. The dilute acid
solution is removed from the cup and replaced by some pure mercury. The
connections remain the same as for the "bare point." The potentiometer
is adjusted until the potential of the battery is in the neighborhood of
0.2-0.4 volt.

The tantalum wire may be easily secured by breaking the globe of a
tantalum lamp and using a piece of the filament. It is best to snip off
the lamp tip before breaking the globe. This precaution admits the air
and prevents an explosion which would shatter the glass and scatter the
filament in fragments.

If the universal detector is used with a tantalum point, turn the small
thumbscrew until the wire almost touches the surface of the mercury.
Then lower it with the large adjusting screw until the tantalum touches
the surface and a sharp click is heard in the telephone receivers.
Adjust the potentiometer until the signals are the loudest.



CRYSTAL DETECTORS.


Certain minerals and crystals, principally members of the carbon and
sulphur groups, possess the peculiar property of rectifying electrical
oscillations and converting them into a pulsating direct current. These
crystals conduct the current better in one direction than in the other.
In the case of a current having a potential of ten volts and applied to
the ends of a carborundum crystal, the current may be one hundred times
greater when flowing in one direction than when flowing in the other.
This ratio decreases as the voltage is raised, for with 25 volts it may
be only about forty times greater. The crystals when properly inserted
in the aerial circuit are enabled to rectify the oscillations and
produce sounds in the telephone receivers without the aid of a battery.

The following is a partial list of the minerals and crystals exhibiting
these properties to a sufficient extent that they are of value as
oscillation detectors in wireless telegraphy.

In the case of iron pyrites the writer has found that a specimen of this
mineral containing very little or no copper as an impurity does not
exhibit these properties to an appreciable extent.

[Illustration: Fig. 104. United Wireless Carborundum Detector
(horizontal type).]

In order to use the universal detector for minerals, a special contact
similar to that shown in Fig. 90 must be made. The contact is bored and
threaded on its under side to fit a brass pin 3/4 inch long and having
an 8-32 thread. The other end of the pin screws into the hole in the
bedplate. The large knurled portion of the contact permits it to be
raised or lowered without the fingers coming in contact with the
crystal. The crystal is clamped between the contact and the spring, _S_.
The position is varied until a sensitive spot is found and then the
pressure is carefully regulated by means of the large adjusting screw
until the signals in the telephone receivers are the loudest. If
possible avoid touching the crystals with the fingers, as the oil and
dirt, even though it cannot always be seen, spoils their value for long
distance work. Use instead a pair of steel forceps.

[Illustration: Fig. 105. United Wireless Carborundum Detector (vertical
type).]

The United Wireless Telegraph Co. makes use of carborundum in the
detectors shown in Figs. 104 and 105. The principal advantage of
carborundum over such substances as silicon, etc., is that it is not
affected by the heavy discharge of the transmitting apparatus and does
not require a new adjustment after each period of sending. All the
crystals will not work, and so a large cake should be purchased and the
desired crystals selected. The dark blue portions of the mass, which are
the hardest, will give the clearest tones in the telephone receivers,
and are preferable to the lighter colored crystals. Since the crystals
conduct better in one direction than in the other, as explained above,
the adjustment must be made with the view of determining in which
position the particular crystal will work the best.

Carborundum will produce sounds in the telephone receivers without the
aid of any battery, but for careful work a battery and a potentiometer
are necessary.

The other crystals given in the column merely require that the telephone
receivers be connected to the detector terminals as in the wiring
diagram in Fig. 108.

The Clapp-Eastham detector makes use of a crystal of iron pyrites held
in a brass retaining cup beneath the metal contact point. It is not
affected by strong signals and requires no battery or potentiometer.
When adjusted it will remain in a sensitive condition for a long time
without further attention.

[Illustration: Fig. 106. Clapp-Eastham Ferron Detector.]

*Silicon Detector.*While the silicon and "perikon" detectors are
classed as mineral or crystal detectors they deserve special attention.

[Illustration: Fig. 107. Silicon Crystal in Cup.]

Silicon gives fair results if a crystal is placed between two metal
electrodes as, for instance, between the contact and spring of the
"universal" detector, but is much more sensitive when properly mounted.
A brass cup such as that shown in Fig. 90 is made and the interior
brightened by scraping with a file. The cup is then poured full of a
molten fusible alloy and the silicon pressed in it until it cools and
becomes set. It should then present an appearance similar to that shown
by _A_ in Fig. 107. The silicon is ground down by rubbing on the surface
of a clean oilstone kept well wet with water, until the surface is flat
and shows a polish.

[Illustration: Fig. 108. Silicon Detector Circuits.]

The cup containing the silicon is placed over the hole in the bedplate
of the universal detector. A knurled brass thumbscrew having a point on
its lower end is screwed into the collar on the spring, _S_, and brought
to bear on the polished surface of the silicon. The pressure may be
easily regulated by means of the large adjusting screw until the signals
in the telephone receivers are the loudest. It is not advisable to
fasten the cup to the bedplate but merely to brighten the bottom so as
to insure a good contact. The cup may then be moved around so that
different portions of the polished surface of the silicon may be brought
into play when desirable.

If the knurled brass thumbscrew is fitted with a platinum point which
can be brought to bear on the surface of the silicon, the efficiency of
the detector will be materially increased.

When mounting silicon or other crystals some careless experimenters use
lead or a metal having a high melting point instead of a fusible alloy.
This is poor policy because the high temperature coats the surface of
the crystals and the interior of the cup with a non-conducting layer
which destroys the sensitiveness and makes it unfit for long distance
work. A fusible alloy melting at about the boiling point of water or
even lower should be used. Such alloys are usually composed of tin, lead
and bismuth. The addition of a little cadmium serves to make the fusing
point considerably lower in each case. The alloys may be prepared by the
experimenter from the following formulae, or are obtainable from a firm
manufacturing fire plugs for automatic fire extinguishers.

The lead should be melted first and then the bismuth, tin and cadmium
added in the order named.

*Perikon Detector.*The Perikon detector is one of the latest types to
come into extensive use. It consists of two crystals, zincite and
chalcopyrites, set in cups in the manner just described and placed in
contact with each other. The minerals are mounted similar to those in
Fig. 105. The zincite should present a rather flat surface with the
grain of the crystal parallel to the sides of the cup so that the top
surface corresponds to the end of a stick of wood sawed at right angles
to the grain. More than one crystal of zincite is usually set in the
same cup. The chalcopyrites should present a rather blunt point. The cup
containing the chalcopyrites is the smaller and is bored and threaded to
fit a thumbscrew which passes through the collar in the spring, S, of
the "universal" detector. The bottom of the cup containing the zincite
is brightened so as to insure a good contact and then placed on the bed
plated under the cup containing the chalcopyrites which is fastened to
the thumbscrew. The zincite may then be moved around until the most
sensitive portion is found. The chalcopyrites is lowered until it comes
into contact with the zincite and then the pressure regulated by means
of the large adjusting screw.

[Illustration: Fig. 109. Perikon Detector Elements.]

The Perikon detector gives excellent results without a battery and is
preferably used in that manner. If a battery is used, a potentiometer to
lower the voltage is necessary.

When adjusting this or the carborundum detector where a battery is used,
the pressure must be very carefully regulated until it is found to be
the best. When the pressure is light the signals in the phones are due
to an imperfect contact, and when it is slightly increased the
rectifying properties of the crystal are brought into play.

The Perikon detector illustrated in Fig. 110 is somewhat similar to that
used for commercial work.

The standards or posts supporting the cups which contain the elements
are brass rods 1/2 inch square and 1 1/2 inches high. A hole is bored in
the bottom of each and threaded with an 8-32 tap to receive a machine
screw which passes through the base and holds them in an upright
position. A hole is bored 1 1/8 inches from the bottom, in the face of
one standard and threaded with an 8-32 tap. A brass rod 1 1/4 inches
long, carrying at one end a cup 1 inch in diameter and 3/8 inch deep, is
threaded to fit in the hole in the standard. The zincite is mounted in
this cup.

[Illustration: Fig. 110. Perikon Detector.]

The other standard is cut in half with a hack saw and a 1/8-inch hole
bored 1/4 inch deep in the axis of each piece. A pin, 1/2 inch long, is
set in the lower half by soldering it in the hole. The upper half of the
standard is placed over the pin and left free to move when twisted. A
1/8-inch brass tube, 1 inch long, passes through the upper part of the
standard. A 1/8-inch brass rod, 1 3/4 inches long, passes through the
tube.

The small cup containing the zincite is mounted on one end of the rod
and a hard rubber handle on the other.

A brass spring is placed between the cup and the standard in order to
press the chalcopyrites against the zincite. The cup is mounted out of
center so that by revolving it and twisting the standard at the same
time the chalcopyrites may be brought into contact with any portion of
the zincite. By screwing the rod supporting the zincite cup in or out of
the standard the pressure with which the two elements are pressed
together may be regulated.

The base of the detector is hard rubber of the dimensions indicated in
the illustration. Four binding posts on each corner of the base are
necessary. The detector is connected in a similar manner to the silicon
detector shown in Fig. 108. If a battery is used the circuit should be
like that of the "bare point" electrolytic, and the current must flow
from the zincite to the chalcopyrites.



LEAD PEROXIDE DETECTOR.


The peroxide of lead detector makes use of no liquids, but still may be
classed as an electrolytic since its action is of that nature.

[Illustration: Fig. 111. Peroxide of Lead Detector.]

It consists of a pellet of lead peroxide held between an electrode of
lead and one of platinum. Contrary to most other detectors, the
resistance is increased upon the passage of electrical oscillations. The
oscillations stimulate chemical action and increase a
counter-electromotive force sufficiently so that a decrease in the
current sent through the phones by the local battery takes place. The
action may be outlined more in detail as follows. The current of the
local battery decomposes part of the lead peroxide into its components,
lead and oxygen. The lead ions are positively electrified and so they
tend to pass upward toward the lead electrode which is negative. The
negative ions of oxygen gas tend to pass downwards towards the platinum.
But the lead and platinum electrodes with the intervening lead peroxide
constitute a small cell acting independently of the local battery and
sending a current in the opposite direction. This counter-electromotive
force tends to send the ions in an opposite direction to that in which
they are sent by the battery current. Upon the passage of electrical
oscillations this counter electromotive force is increased and
sufficient ions sent out in opposition to those of the battery current
so that an appreciable drop in the current flowing through the telephone
receivers takes place. The sudden current drop produces a sound in the
receivers.

The lead pellets may be secured from a druggist who can mold them in his
tablet press. They should be subjected to as great a pressure as
possible in order to reduce resistance and prevent crumbling.

A piece of platinum foil about 1/2 inch square is placed beneath the
pellet on the crystal electrode. A piece of clean, bright sheet lead 3/8
inch in diameter and 1/8 inch thick is laid on the pellet and the whole
clamped together by tightening the thumbscrew passing through the collar
on the spring, _S_. The detector is connected up similar to the "bare
point," The platinum is made the positive of the local battery.
Adjustment is secured by regulating the pressure.

It is very necessary that the pellets be kept dry, as otherwise a loud
singing and hissing noise, due to the decomposition of the water, will
render the reception of signals very difficult.



THE MARCONI MAGNETIC DETECTOR.


When an oscillatory discharge takes place through a coil of wire
surrounding a needle, it magnetizes the needle in a totally different
manner from a voltaic current. The needle will have several poles
throughout its length, many of them reversed. Rutherford applied this
phenomenon to the detection of electrical oscillations, but it remained
for Marconi to improve it and give the magnetic detector its existing
form. This type of detector is very sensitive, free from all adjustment
and is not made inoperative by the heavier discharge of the transmitter
during each period of sending.

[Illustration: Fig. 112. Marconi Magnetic Detector.]

A small transformer is provided with a core composed of a band or cord
of iron wires in the form of an endless belt which passes around two
pulleys kept in motion by a clockwork motor. The band revolves in the
field of a strong horseshoe magnet and passes directly over the poles
after issuing from the transformer bobbin, so that the portion
approaching the bobbin are constantly in a state of increasing
magnetism. The actual operation is based upon the property of iron
called hysteresis, for the magnetism of the core lags behind that of the
permanent magnet and is of a different degree from what it ought to be,
in view of its position in the vicinity of the permanent magnet. The
moment the oscillations pass through the primary coil of the
transformer, this lag is set free and the magnetism assumes its full
value. The change in magnetism induces a current in the secondary, which
registers as a sound in the telephone receivers.

[Illustration: Fig. 113. Details of Transformer.]

The primary coil is made up of a single layer of No. 36 B. S. gauge silk
covered wire wound on a thin walled glass or hard rubber tube. The ends
of the tube, which is 2 inches long and 1/4 inch external diameter, are
slightly flared so as not to chafe the band. The primary is thoroughly
shellacked and covered with a single layer of paper.

The secondary is also of No. 36 B. S. silk covered wire and is wound
between two disks of hard rubber, 1/4 inch thick and 1 1/2 inches in
diameter, placed 3/8 inch apart in the center of the secondary and the
intervening space wound full of wire.

The terminals of both the primary and secondary are extended to binding
posts mounted on the case of the instrument.

[Illustration: Fig. 114. Method of Joining Ends of Band.]

The core or revolving band is made by winding 100 strands of No. 36 silk
covered soft iron wire between two small pegs, placed a distance apart,
equal to twice the circumference of the oval formed by the two pulleys.
The wire is all wound in the same direction. It should be carefully
removed from the pegs and kept taut while it is slightly twisted,
doubled, and then further twisted into a rope or cord. The ends are
threaded together with a separate piece of insulated wire, into a link
which will pass easily through the primary tube.

[Illustration: Fig. 115. Pulley.]

The pulleys around which the band revolves are made of hard wood. They
are 4 inches in diameter and 3/8 inch thick and have a V-shaped groove
cut in the edge. In order to minimize friction and wear, it is advisable
to fit them with a bearing which may be made out of brass tubing and a
couple of washers. One of the pulleys is geared to a clockwork motor so
that the band makes a complete revolution about once every two minutes.
An old eight day clock may be adapted for this purpose, or, what is much
better, the motor from an old phonograph.

[Illustration: Fig. 116. Pulley Bearings.]

The horseshoe magnet is mounted with its north pole pointing towards and
nearly touching the middle of the outside of the secondary. The south
pole is placed opposite the end of the primary tube which is on the side
towards which the band is revolving, that is, the band in revolving
passes first over the north pole and then over the south. Two magnets
are sometimes used with their north poles together in the center of the
secondary, and a south pole opposite each end of the primary tube.

[Illustration: Fig. 117. Circuit of Magnetic Detector.]

The commercial instrument is placed in a glass covered case which
protects it from dust and injury. The clockwork motor is concealed in
the lower part of the case. This is a good plan but an experimental
detector may be merely mounted on a flat wooden base as illustrated in
Fig. 112.

The secondary terminals are connected directly to the telephone
receivers while the primary leads to the aerial and the ground. When the
detector is started up it should make a very slight hissing sound in the
telephone receivers as the band passes slowly through the coils. This
shows the instrument to be in good working order and ready for the
reception of signals.

*The Audion.*Dr. Lee DeForest was led by the flickering of a sensitive
gas flame to investigate whether or not it would respond to Hertzian
vibrations as well as to those of heat and sound. His experiments led to
the invention of the audion, a peculiar instrument making use of ionized
gas for its operation.

The audion consists of an incandescent lamp having a metallic filament,
on either side of which are a grid and a plate made of nickel. When the
filament is lighted it throws off ions which act as a relay to high
frequency oscillations passing between the plate and the grid. A
properly constructed audion is exceedingly sensitive and produces very
loud tones in the telephone receivers. It has the further advantages of
entire absence of adjustment except the governing of the battery
voltage, and is capable of extremely fine tuning.

[Illustration: Fig. 118. Fleming Oscillation Valve.]

Fleming originated the oscillation valve illustrated in Fig. 118. It
consists of an ordinary incandescent lamp with a carbon filament, having
a metal cylinder, _C_, placed around the filament, but attached to an
independently insulated platinum wire sealed in the glass. When the lamp
is lighted by passing a current through the filament, the incandescent
carbon liberates negative ions. If oscillations are then set up in a
circuit which includes a pair of sensitive telephone receivers and is
formed by connecting the negative terminal of the filament with the
platinum cylinder, negative electricity will be enabled to pass from the
filament to the cylinder but not in the opposite direction, and so
sounds will be produced in the telephone receivers. High frequency
oscillations themselves could not be made to pass through the telephone
receivers because of the choking action of the iron cores of the
electromagnets.

[Illustration: Fig. 119. Flame Audion.]

The simple but sensitive form of detector illustrated in Fig. 119 is not
of practical value for commercial work, but is very interesting as the
progenitor of the audion, and provides a good field for amateur
investigation. Its only drawback is that the gas flame is very difficult
to keep steady and every flicker registers as a sound in the telephone
receivers.

A Bunsen burner using coal gas furnishes the flame, and a salt of an
alkaline metal heated in the flame, the ions. The hydroxides of caesium,
potassium and sodium give the best results in the order named.

The salt is contained in a piece of trough-shaped platinum foil, about
3/8 inch long and 1/16 inch wide. This trough is made the cathode or
negative of the telephone circuit and placed in the outer oxidizing
flame just above its juncture with the interior reducing flame and must
be kept incandescent. The upper electrode or anode is a piece of
platinum wire about 1/16 inch above the trough.

[Illustration: Fig. 120. Circuit of Flame Audion.]

The arrangement and construction of the detector is clearly indicated by
the drawing so that it is unnecessary to go into details. The block,
_E_, which fits on the tube of the Bunsen burner, is made of fiber. Two
double binding posts, _D_, are fastened to _E_ to support the rods, _R_,
which are fitted at the tops with binding posts, _B_, into which the
electrodes may be clamped.

Twelve dry cells are connected with a multiple point switch so that an
electromotive force of 6-18 volts, varying in steps of one cell at a
time, may be secured. The flame is best provided with a mica chimney to
protect it from drafts. By keeping plenty of salt in the trough and
carefully adjusting the voltage, this detector may be made marvelously
sensitive.

     The different detectors in order of their sensitiveness are
      electrolytic, perikon, magnetic, silicon, carborundum.

     Peacock ore or bornite, which consists of about 60 parts of
      copper, 14 parts of iron and 26 parts of sulphur, may be
      substituted for the chalcopyrites with excellent results.




CHAPTER XIV. TUNING COILS AND TRANSFORMERS.


A tuning coil is merely a variable inductance wound in single layer on a
suitable form.

Fig. 121 illustrates a double slide tuner. The base is a piece of hard
wood, 12 inches long, 1 inch thick and 5 1/2 inches wide. Two wooden
heads 4 x 4 x 3/4 inches support the form upon which the coil is wound.

[Illustration: Fig. 121. Double-slide Tuning Coil.]

The form is a piece of wooden curtain pole, 9 inches long and 3 inches
in diameter. Some may prefer to use a cardboard tube in place of the
curtain pole. A tube can be made by winding a long strip of cardboard 9
inches wide around a suitable form and cementing the layers together
with shellac. The liberal use of shellac will stiffen the tube and cause
it to better retain its shape. The tube is held tightly between the two
heads by means of a brass rod which passes through the center and is
clamped by two nuts.

A square brass rod 10 1/2 inches long is fastened to the center of the
top of the heads and a similar rod to the center of the front face.

[Illustration: Fig. 122. Sliders.]

Fig. 122 shows two forms of sliders. The first one is the better and to
be preferred. A short square brass tube, _S_, fits snugly upon the
square brass rod, _R_. It cannot turn around but is free to slide back
and forth. A strip of spring brass, _C_, is soldered to the lower face
of the square tube. It is bent in a double turn and a punch mark made
near the lower end as shown in the illustration. The indentation is made
with a center punch, but should not be deep enough to break through the
metal.

[Illustration: Fig. 123. Double-slide Tuning Coil Circuits.]

The little projection on the under side of _C_ caused by the punch mark
is the only part of the slider which should make contact with the wire
on the tuning coil. It should slide easily but firmly along the wires
and touch only one at a time. Long distance signals will be considerably
weakened if the slider touches more than one wire at a time and
short-circuits a turn.

[Illustration: *Plate IV. Receiving Circuits. (Straightaway Aerial.)*]

The slider, _B_, is similar to _A_ except that it has a short length of
brass tubing, _T_, soldered to the under side of _S_ in place of the
brass strip, _C_. A small ball bearing which just fits the bore of the
tube is pushed down into contact with the wire by means of a small
spiral spring inside of the tube. Both sliders are fitted with a hard
rubber handle so that they may be adjusted without the ringers coming
into contact with the metal.

[Illustration: Fig. 124. Murdock Double-slide Tuning Coil.]

[Illustration: Fig. 125. United Wireless Receiving Set.]

Two good circuits employing the double slide tuner are given in Fig.
123. Plates IV and V illustrate the oscillation or tuning circuits of
the most prominent receptor systems.

If a loop aerial is used, more than one tuning coil is necessary as
shown by the loop aerial oscillation circuits in Plate V.

Figs. 125 and 126 illustrate the instruments employed for receiving by
the United Wireless Company.

[Illustration: Fig. 126. United Wireless Portable Receiving Set.]

In Fig. 125 the handles which are attached to the sliders of the tuning
coils project through long slots cut in the top and one side of the
cabinet.

The tuning coils in the portable outfit are mounted in a vertical
position in back of the aerial switch.

*Loosely Coupled Tuning Coil.*By the use of a loosely coupled receiving
tuner or transformer, the range of a station is considerably increased,
as is also the strength of the signals, and much finer tuning and
selectivity made possible.

Fig. 127 illustrates the construction of such an oscillation
transformer.

The base is wood and measures 14 x 5 1/2 x 1 inches. The primary winding
is wound on a cardboard or fiber tube 4 1/4 inches long, having an
internal diameter of 2 3/4 inches and an external diameter of 3 inches.
The heads, _L_ and _M_, are the same size as those of the double slide
tuning coil. The head, _L_, has a circular hole 2 3/4 inches in diameter
cut in the center in order to permit the secondary coil to slide in and
out of the primary.

[Illustration: Fig. 127. Oscillation Transformer.]

The secondary coil is a piece of round curtain pole 2 1/2 inches in
diameter and 3 inches long. A 5/16-inch hole is bored through its axis.
The head, _K_, of the secondary coil is 3 3/4 x 3 3/4 x 3/4 inches. A
ten-point switch on _K_ is so connected that it divides the secondary
into ten equal parts and permits any number of the divisions to be used
as desired.

[Illustration: Fig. 128. United Wireless Receiving Transformer.]

A wooden post, _J_, 2 1/2 inches high and 1 1/4 inches wide, supports
one end of a 1/4-inch brass rod upon which the secondary slides back and
forth.

[Illustration: Fig. 129. Details of Receiving Transformer.]

No. 24 B. S. gauge copper wire may be used for winding both the primary
and secondary. It is also the proper size to use on the double slide
tuner. The best method is to use bare wire, wound with a thread so that
a thread is interposed between adjacent turns of the winding. Give the
whole winding one or two coats of thick shellac and allow it to harden.
Then use a strip of sandpaper to remove the shellac in a long narrow
path immediately below the sliders so that they may make contact with
the wire.

[Illustration: Fig. 130. Slider for Loose Coupler.]

Some may prefer to make a loosely coupled tuner in which the inductance
of both coils is adjustable by means of a sliding contact. In such a
case the slider on the secondary coil must be constructed as illustrated
in Fig. 130. The contact is long and narrow so that it can touch the
innermost turns, when placed within the primary. By slipping the slider
off the end of the rod and reversing it, the contact can be made to
touch the turns next to the head. The square brass rod is set in a notch
cut in the coil head so that the rod is flush with the top.

When tuning a receiving transformer, place both variable condensers in a
halfway position and adjust the sliding contacts, first on the primary
and then on the secondary, until the signals are the loudest. Then
adjust the condensers.

[Illustration: Fig. 131. Loosely Coupled Tuning Circuits.]

To cut out an undesirable station, vary the coupling between the two
coils by sliding the secondary away from the primary. When several turns
on the secondary seem to give the same results also vary the coupling.

[Illustration: Fig. 132. Combination Loosely and Closely Coupled Tuner.]

Fig. 132 illustrates the wiring diagram of a combination loosely and
closely coupled tuner. Two sliding contacts are placed on the primary
coil of the receiving transformer and connected with a double pole
double throw switch as in the diagram. When the switch is thrown on
contacts 1 and 2, the primary is connected to the detector as a double
slide tuner, and when on 3 and 4 both the primary and secondary are
brought into use as a transformer.

This arrangement may seem cumbersome and is recommended only as a
convenience in experimenting. A loosely coupled tuning coil is capable
of exact tuning, and unless one understands how to use it, he may not
hear a station because the tuner is not properly adjusted. By using the
double slide tuner first and then throwing the switch so as to tune in
on the transformer, this difficulty may be eliminated.

[Illustration: Fig. 133. Clapp-Eastham Loose Coupler.]

*Potentiometer.*A potentiometer is not properly classed under the
heading of tuning coils, but the construction may be made so similar
that it well appears here.

The potentiometer is merely a variable resistance shunted across the
terminals of the detector battery in the manner illustrated in the
numerous detector circuits. It is used to reduce the voltage of the
battery to a value slightly below the critical voltage of the detector.
The critical voltage of a detector is the voltage at which its action
commences. In the case of an electrolytic detector, it is the voltage
required to break down the thin film of gas which collects on the "bare
point."

[Illustration: Fig. 134. A Highly Efficient Form of Loose Coupler.]

In construction, the potentiometer illustrated in Fig. 135 is in reality
a small edition of a double slide tuning coil. It is wound with No. 28
B. S. gauge German silver wire. Three binding posts are mounted on the
base, two of them connecting with the ends of the coil and one with the
sliding contact.

[Illustration: Fig. 135. Potentiometer.]

In a finely balanced circuit where long distance work and close tuning
are desired, the potentiometer must be non-inductive.

[Illustration: Fig. 136. Amco Potentiometer.]

This may be accomplished by using two potentiometers wound in opposite
directions from one another and connected in series. The two terminals
of the windings are then connected across the battery and the sliding
contacts led to the detector.

[Illustration: *Plate V. Receiving Circuits.*]




CHAPTER XV. RECEIVING CONDENSERS.


Condensers play an important part in tuning and adjusting the receiving
circuits of a wireless telegraph station. They are inserted in the
circuits for various purposes. In some places a small condenser shunts
the detector to somewhat equalize any small changes in capacity which
might occur in the detector and throw the circuit out of tune. In other
cases where selectivity is desired they provide a path for undesirable
oscillations and allow them to flow into the ground without passing
through the detector. Wherever the double slide tuner or the Fessenden
single slider circuit is used, a condenser must be inserted in the
circuit to prevent the wire of the tuning coil from short-circuiting the
telephone receivers and battery.

[Illustration: Fig. 137. Tuning Circuit with and without an Adjustable
Condenser.]

The value of a condenser may be readily appreciated by the following
experiment. Connect up a detector according to the diagram shown by _A_
of Fig. 137. This circuit will give good results and the signals will be
clear. But change it to that shown in _B_, by connecting one side of a
variable condenser to the upper contact of the tuning coil and leading
the other side to the ground. Considerable selectivity may now be
attained and the signals will be 50 per cent louder.

To be of any value for a receiving circuit the capacity of the condenser
must be adjustable, but there are many places where a fixed condenser is
of service.

The average capacity of such condensers generally ranges around .003 of
a microfarad, but cannot be predetermined, as it depends upon many
factors which vary greatly in different stations. Even if specific
dimensions were given for the construction of a paper condenser of
stated capacity, the experimenter would very seldom succeed in
constructing his condenser and have it of this value when finished. The
paper used as the dielectric and the pressure applied to the condenser
would make the difference.

The best plan is to build one up in the form of a roll as follows. Three
thin tin foil strips 3 1/2 inches wide and four feet long are separated
by strips of thin paraffined paper 4 inches wide and four and one-half
feet long. The two outside strips of tin foil are connected together and
form one terminal of the condenser. The middle strip of tin foil is the
other. The outside strips of tin foil are covered with paraffined paper
and the whole rolled up. If thin paper and tin foil are used the
condenser will form a roll 4 inches long and less than an inch in
diameter.

Two or three such condensers should be constructed, and one of them
connected up in the circuit where it is desirable to use it. By
unrolling a little of the condenser and cutting one or two inches off at
a time the proper size may be determined.

As explained in Chapter VII, two equal condensers connected in series
have one-half the capacity of either. By connecting them in parallel the
capacity is the sum of the two. In this manner it is not hard to first
find the approximate capacity, which gives the best results before
cutting the condenser.

[Illustration: Fig. 138. Tubular Condenser.]

When the proper value is found, place the condenser in a brass tube
about 5 inches long and 1 inch in diameter. The tube is fitted with hard
rubber flanges to close the ends. A binding post is mounted on each
flange, and connects with the terminal of the condenser to which it is
nearest.

Mounting a condenser in this manner gives it a much better appearance
and it occupies less space than otherwise. Fixed condensers are used in
two cases only, to shunt the condenser and to prevent the tuning coil
from short-circuiting the telephone receivers. In any other position
they are worthless.

*Variable Condensers.*A simple form of adjustable condenser which may
be quickly made for a special experiment is constructed in the following
manner. A wooden curtain pole 2 inches in diameter and 18 inches long is
covered with a layer of tin foil. The tin foil must be laid on smoothly
and cemented with shellac. A layer of paraffined paper is then placed
over the tin foil. A piece of sheet copper or tin 6 3/4 inches wide and
18 inches long is rolled up in a cylinder to fit over the rod with its
tin foil and paper. The rod is fastened at one end to a base board about
20 inches long and 4 inches wide, by means of a bracket, or it may be
mounted on a smaller base in a vertical position.

Connections are made to the tin foil and to the outside metal tube. By
sliding the tube back and forth on the rod the condenser may be given a
variable capacity.

[Illustration: Fig. 139. Variable Condenser.]

The best variable condensers are constructed so that the dielectric
between the two plates is formed by air. There are consequently no
losses of energy in the condenser, for this mode of construction
eliminates all dielectric hysteresis.

Fig. 139 shows such a variable condenser and Fig. 140 the details. It is
possible to do very close, selective tuning with this instrument. The
efficiency of the receiving circuit may be considerably improved if one
is used wherever a condenser is required.

A rectangular box is built up in the manner shown in Fig. 135. The
sides, _D_, are 6 inches long, 4 11/16 inches wide and 1/2 inch thick.
The top, _A_, is 6 inches long, 1 13/16 inches wide and 1/2 inch thick.
The bottom, _B_, has the same width and thickness but is 11 inches long.
Eleven grooves are cut in _A_ and _B_ as shown in the cross section. The
grooves are 1/16 inch wide, 3/16 inch deep and 1/16 inch apart. They are
formed by setting the blade of a circular saw so that it projects 3/16
inch above the table or bed. After cutting one groove, the guide is
moved 1/8 inch and another cut made.

[Illustration: Fig. 140. Details of Variable Condenser.]

Eleven metal plates, _P_, are required, six fixed and five movable. They
are made of No. 22 gauge sheet brass and measure 4 x 6 inches. Six of
them are placed in the grooves in the box in such a manner that an empty
groove is left between each one. The six plates are then electrically
connected together by soldering a strip of brass across their rear ends.

[Illustration: Fig. 141. Sliding Plate Variable Condenser.]

Five slots each 1/4 inch deep and 1/4 inch apart are made with a hack
saw in a piece of brass, _C_, 1 1/2 inches long, 3/4 inch wide and 1/2
inch thick. A small pin 1/2 inch long is set in the center of _C_ on the
opposite side from the saw cuts. A fiber handle 1/2 inch in diameter and
1 1/2 inches long is fastened to the pin.

The five movable brass plates are set in the grooves between the six
fixed plates. They are allowed to project three or four inches out of
the box. The yoke, _C_, is then soldered across the ends so that each
one of the movable plates fits into its corresponding saw cut.

The capacity of the condenser is varied by sliding the movable plates
back and forth between the fixed plates.

A binding post is soldered to the yoke, _C_, and another one to the
strip which holds the fixed plates together. Connections are made to the
binding posts with lamp cord or some other flexible conductor which will
not interfere with the movement of the plates.

The instrument is finished by staining the woodwork and giving it a coat
of varnish or shellac.




CHAPTER XVI. TELEPHONE RECEIVERS AND HEADBANDS.


A pair of high resistance telephone receivers in nice adjustment
constitute one of the most sensitive electrical instruments in existence
and will detect an exceedingly weak current.

The only type of receiver of much service in wireless telegraphy is that
known as a watch case or pony receiver. It is small and compact so that
it may be attached to a headband and clamped against the ear.

[Illustration: Fig. 142. Types of Permanent Magnets.]

The permanent magnets of a watch-case receiver are usually in the form
of either a ring or a horseshoe as shown by Fig. 142. The first form has
"consequent" poles and is considered somewhat superior to the horseshoe,
since the lines of force are not so liable to pass across the pole
pieces before they pass through the electromagnets and the diaphragm.

The ordinary low resistance telephone receiver is perfectly well suited
to the telephone work for which it was designed and adjusted, and will
give good service on a wireless receptor for short distances, but can be
considerably improved by following the suggestions and instructions
given below.

The principal objection to the ordinary receiver is that it does not
contain enough turns of wire on its bobbins. This is easily remedied by
carefully rewinding them with a very fine silk covered, pure copper
magnet wire no larger than No. 40 B. S. gauge. This will increase the
number of turns and also the resistance, but it must not be inferred
that resistance is to be desired. This is a common impression of
amateurs who do not understand the underlying principle, that the
strength of an electromagnet varies directly as the number of turns of
wire, multiplied by the amperes flowing through the magnet. When a
telephone receiver is wound with a finer wire the resistance is
increased, cutting down both the current and the strength of the magnet.
But if pure copper wire is used, and the winding not carried beyond the
point where the circumference of the outside layer becomes twice as
great as the circumference of the first layer, the number of turns
increases faster than the resistance and the magnet strength is
considerably greater than before the receiver was rewound.

No. 40 B. S. gauge silk covered wire is often used for this purpose, but
the best results are obtained with enameled covered wire of the same
size. It is possible to wind almost three times as much of the enameled
wire on a telephone bobbin as silk wire of the same size. The difference
is due to the thickness of the insulation. An ordinary double pole
watch-case receiver will have a resistance of 800-1,000 ohms when wound
with silk covered wire and 1,500-1,800 ohms when wound with enameled
wire.

To rewind a telephone receiver, first unscrew the cap and remove the
diaphragm, then remove the bobbins by unloosening the screws with the
aid of a screw driver. Unwind the old wire and examine the empty bobbins
to see that wherever the wire is liable to come into contact with the
metal that it is well insulated with paraffined paper or some other
equally good material. Then wind the new wire on in smooth even layers
and when it is completed fasten the bobbins back on the permanent
magnets and connect them up. The current should flow through in opposite
directions so that the north pole of one and the south pole of the other
is on top. Do not trust splice connections but solder them using acid as
a flux.

The Navy Department specifies that its wireless receivers shall be wound
with copper wire of not less than 0.0015 inch in diameter and the
diaphragm to have a diameter of 1 3/4 inches and a thickness of 0.004
inch. The resistance of the coils is specified at 1,000-1,100 ohms.
There is not much advantage in greatly exceeding the number of turns
possible with this winding, for to obtain them a much finer wire than
No. 40 B. S. gauge is necessary and the ratio between resistance and
turns becomes greater.

The second objection to the ordinary receiver is that the diaphragms are
very often too thick. A receiver having a thin diaphragm is preferable
because when a weak current is sent through the coils, the change in
magnet strength is greater. But this may be carried to excess and the
diaphragm made so thin that it cannot absorb sufficient lines of force
to properly play its part. The best thickness then for a diaphragm can
only be determined experimentally and depends much upon the diameter.
The distance from the poles and the strength of the magnets will also
have considerable bearing on the thickness. The ordinary phone will be
very sensitive and give clear tones with diaphragms ranging from
.01-.004 inch.

The relation between the thickness and the diameter is shown by the
following: If the diaphragm of a receiver is increased in diameter, the
tones will become more distinct, but if the increase is carried too far
they will become indistinct and the only remedy is to thicken the
diaphragm. Likewise if after clearness is secured the diaphragm is
thickened so that the tones again become indistinct, the diameter must
be increased.

[Illustration: Fig. 143. Grinding Tool.]

The third objection is that such receivers are not carefully and
properly adjusted. The adjustment is also a matter of experiment and is
accomplished by comparison of the receiver in question with one which is
known to be in a sensitive condition. The adjusting may be done by means
of the tool shown in Fig. 143.

This tool is made from an ordinary file by grinding off the teeth on one
side save for a distance of about 3/4 inch in the middle. The grinding
may be done on an emery wheel. The part (_a_) is used for filing the
pole pieces and thus making the distance between them and the diaphragm
greater. The tool has the advantage over an ordinary file of permitting
the poles to be filed without removal from the receiver and without
grooving the diaphragm bed or the receiver case.

To lessen the distance between the poles and the diaphragm, lay the
receiver bed downward on a piece of fine emery paper and rub with a
circular scouring motion. If the emery paper is placed on a perfectly
flat surface no trouble will be experienced in grinding the bed down
evenly.

When filing the pole pieces rub with the same circular motion so as to
grind off all sides evenly. Test from time to time by passing a straight
edge over the bed in all directions while holding to the light and
looking between the straight edge and the poles. In this manner the
distance separating the diaphragm and the poles may be gauged and
whether or not it is the same on all sides. Bear in mind that if the
diaphragm is thin, the attraction of the permanent magnets will cause it
to bend in towards the poles.

In case you have a pair of receivers built for wireless work, which
appear to be in good condition but do not give their former results, the
last thing to do is to tamper with the adjustment. The most common
cause, when the tones are impaired, is dirt or dust accumulated on the
poles or diaphragm and damping its vibration. The cap should be
carefully unscrewed and the diaphragm examined to see if it is bent. If
so, replace with a new one of the same size. Remove any dirt or filings,
and if the diaphragm is rusty clean it by laying it on a flat surface
and rubbing it with a piece of fine emery paper. Then give it a thin
coat of colorless lacquer. Examine the magnets and pole pieces to see if
they have become loosened and if so tighten them.

Or the trouble may be that the permanent magnets have lost part of their
magnetism, and almost any receiver which has been in use for some length
of time will bear having its magnets strengthened. If they are found to
be weak they should be removed and remagnetized. This is accomplished by
winding a coil of No. 18 B. S. gauge wire around them and sending a
heavy direct current through for a few minutes.

[Illustration: Fig. 144. Parts of a Holtzer Cabot Receiver.]

In carrying out any of these suggestions remember to work with one
receiver at a time, keeping the other for comparison, so that by
repeated tests you may tell whether or not an improvement is being made
and when well enough is reached, let it alone.

Fig. 144 shows the construction of a telephone receiver manufactured by
the Holtzer Cabot Co. of Brookline, Mass. The permanent magnets and
bobbins are mounted in a metal cup, _B_, which supports the diaphragm,
_A_. The metal cup is enclosed in a hard rubber shell, _C_, and fitted
with a cap, _D_.

The complete receivers are mounted on an adjustable headband and fitted
with pneumatic ear cushions which make them set more comfortably and
shut out extraneous noise. These receivers are wound to all resistances
used in the wireless field but, for the experimenter, those having a
resistance of 1000 ohms apiece will give the best all around results.

[Illustration: Fig. 145. Holtzer Cabot Head Set.]

It is very desirable that the receivers should be fitted with a
comfortable headband which will hold the telephones in close adjustment
to the ears. Fig. 146 shows the construction of such a band.

[Illustration: Fig. 146. Adjustable Head Band.]

Two brass straps, 1 inch wide, 12 inches long and 1/16 inch thick are
necessary. Two 1/8-inch holes, _mm_, are bored in them 3/16 inch from
one end and the end bent up at an angle along a line 3/8 inch from the
end as shown by the drawing. A cover is made for the straps, by sewing
two strips of leather 1 1/4 inches wide and 12 inches long, together
along their edges. The covers may then be slipped over the straps. Two
1/16-inch brass strips, 3/8 inch wide and a little longer than one-half
the circumference of the watch-case receiver to be fitted to the head
band, are bent into stirrups as shown in the illustration by _Y_. The
ends of the stirrups are fitted with two pivots, _PP_, which are riveted
in a hole. Two holes or recesses are bored in the shell of each
receiver, on the sides 180 degrees apart. The pivots, _PP_, fit into
these holes and form bearings in which the receivers can turn and adjust
themselves to the ears. The stirrup has two small holes, _hh_, bored 3/8
inch apart at the top and tapped to receive a small screw. The screws
pass through the holes, _mm_, and hold the stirrups at the end of their
respective strap.

The leather-covered straps are bound together by means of two clamps
which permit the head band to be adjusted to suit the wearer. The
clamps, _C_, are made from 1/16-inch brass 3/8 inch wide. Their form and
construction may be best understood from the drawing. A small screw eye
is cut in half and soldered to the center of the upper side of the clamp
so that the receiver cord may be passed through the eyelet, _E_.

The telephone receivers should be connected in series by means of a
flexible telephone cord.




CHAPTER XVII. OPERATION.


The first essential in order to manage a wireless station, after
learning the construction and handling of the instruments, is to acquire
a thorough knowledge of the telegraph codes.

The two codes in use in wireless service are the Morse and the
Continental. They are given below.

In some cases, the intending wireless operator has had some experience
with a Morse sounder and then it is merely a matter of transition and of
accustoming the ear to a new sound. However it is always best to learn
the Morse code first as Continental is merely an adaptation in which no
space characters appear.

A beginner may learn to receive most easily by communicating with
another person to whom it is also new. They should first memorize all
the letters of the code and practice transmitting before commencing any
communication.

It is a great mistake for a beginner to start by writing down the dots
and dashes as he receives them on paper. He should make an effort to
translate them and set the characters and words down directly. This at
first will sacrifice speed but will make a better operator and enable
one to become proficient sooner than if he begins otherwise.

In case two complete sets of wireless apparatus are not convenient, one
may learn to read from a buzzer connected to a key and a battery. The
signals may be read directly from the sound of the buzzer itself, but if
a pair of telephone receivers are connected across the terminals, a
sound will be produced in the phones similar to that of a wireless
receptor.

In sending, avoid a short, choppy or jerky style and handle the key with
a light but firm touch. Keep the dots and dashes firm and of the proper
relative length, as also the spaces between letters and words.

The following suggestions and instructions adapted from the Rules and
Regulations governing Naval Wireless Telegraph Stations may be of value
and service to many in operating their instruments.

"The operating room should be well lighted and free from vibration. The
room should have a well insulated entrance for the aerial and should be
fitted with an operating table about two and one-half feet wide, not
less than seven feet long and of a convenient height for working the
sending key.

The table should be of dry, well-seasoned wood and the instruments
should be mounted on the table at safe sparking distances from each
other.

"The connections should all be as direct as possible and well insulated.
High potential leads should be kept away from low potential leads and
where they cross it should be at nearly right angles.

"Sending key contacts must be kept clean and flat with surfaces parallel
to each other.

"All sliding contacts, especially in the receiving tuning coils, should
be kept clean and bright and free from foreign matter. A sending set
working at low power with all connections good, closed and open circuits
in resonance, no sparking from edge of condenser, jar or plates, no glow
from aerial and no sparking to rigging, is utilizing its power much more
efficiently than the same set pushed to the limit with high resistance
connections, sparking at all points and out of resonance."

[Illustration: Fig. 147. Marconi Station at Siasconset, Mass.]

It is a good plan for any amateur to keep a note book in which he can
record the various distances he has been able to receive and transmit.
He should try more than one circuit and jot down the results. It is then
possible to bring a station up to an efficiency which cannot be reached
in any other manner.



ELECTRICAL TERMS AND DEFINITIONS.


_Accumulator:_
       A cell whose positive and negative electrodes are formed or
       deposited by a current flowing from a separate source.

_Aerial:_
       A network or a number of wires insulated from surrounding objects
       and suspended in the air to emit or intercept electromagnetic
       waves.

_Alternating Current:_
       An electric current, of which the direction of flow reverses a
       number of times per second.

_Ampere:_
       The quantity of current which will flow through a resistance of
       one ohm under a potential of one volt. The unit of current.

_Ampere Hour:_
       The quantity of electricity passed when flowing at the rate of
       one ampere for one hour.

_Anode:_
       The positive terminal of a broken circuit or a source of
       electricity. It is the carbon of a cell or the pole at which a
       current enters a solution.

_Capacity:_
       The relative ability of a conductor to receive and retain an
       electric charge.

_Circuit:_
       An unbroken conducting path for an electric current.

_Condenser:_
       A device for receiving and storing up electrostatic energy.

_Cycle:_
       The full period of reversal of an alternating current. A 60-cycle
       current is one making 60 complete reversals per second.

_Detector, Wireless:_
       An instrument for detecting oscillations in the aerial of a
       receiving station. It either varies its own internal resistance
       or generates a weak intermittent direct current similar in time
       and duration with the signals emitted by the transmitting
       station.

_Dielectric:_
       A non-conductor or insulator. It usually refers to the material
       interposed between the oppositely charged coatings of a
       condenser.

_Direct Current:_
       A current flowing in one direction only.

_Electrode:_
       The terminal of an open electric circuit or a conductor carrying
       a current and immersed in an electrolyte.

_Electrolysis:_
       The separation of a chemical compound into its elements by the
       action of an electric current.

_Electrolyte:_
       A solution which will conduct a current of electricity.

_Electromagnet:_
       A mass of iron which is magnetized by the passage of a current of
       electricity through a coil of wire wound around the mass and
       insulated therefrom.

_Farad:_
       The unit of electrical capacity. A condenser having a capacity of
       one farad would be raised to a potential of one volt by one
       ampere flowing for one second.

_Field of Force:_
       The space which is under magnetic stress in the neighborhood of a
       magnet or a wire carrying a current.

_Helix, Transmitting:_
       A coil of heavy wire which furnishes the inductance for the
       closed oscillation circuit of a wireless transmitter and acts as
       an auto-transformer to raise the voltage of the high frequency
       currents.

_Henry:_
       The unit of induction. It is the induction in a circuit when the
       electromotive force induced in this circuit is one volt, while
       the inducing current varies at the rate of one ampere per second.

_Inductance:_
       The property of an electric circuit whereby lines of force are
       developed around it.

_Induction Coil:_
       An instrument or device consisting of two independent coils of
       wire wound around an iron core, and which by magnetic induction
       steps up an intermittent direct current from a low to a high
       voltage.

_Insulator:_
       A non-conductor or a substance impervious to the passage of
       electricity.

_Key:_ A device for making and breaking a current into periods
       corresponding to the dots and dashes of the telegraph code.

_Kilowatt:_
       1,000 watts. See watt.

_Leyden Jar:_
       A static condenser which will store up static electricity and is
       cylindrical in form. So-called because it was originated in
       Leyden, Holland.

_Multiple:_
       The term expressing the connection of several pieces of
       electrical apparatus in parallel with each other so that the
       current is divided between them.

_Ohm:_ The unit of resistance. It is arbitrarily taken as the resistance
       of a column of mercury, one square millimeter in cross sectional
       area and 106 centimeters in height.

_Parallel:_
       The same meaning as multiple. Parallel circuits are those which
       start at a common point and end at a common point.

_Polarization:_
       The collection of hydrogen upon the positive electrode of a
       primary cell with a consequent loss of voltage.

_Potential:_
       Voltage or electrical force.

_Resistance:_
       The quality of an electrical conductor whereby it opposes the
       passage of an electric current. The unit of resistance is the
       ohm.

_Rheostat:_
       A variable resistance to regulate the strength of an electric
       current.

_Series:_
       Opposed to parallel or multiple. Instruments in series are so
       connected that the current passes from one to the other and does
       not divide.

_Spark Gap:_
       An air gap or open space between two electrodes for the passage
       of a high voltage discharge.

_Storage Battery:_
       See accumulator.

_Transformer:_
       A device for stepping up or stepping down the voltage of an
       alternating current by means of magnetic induction.

_Tuning Coil:_
       A variable inductance for changing the period of the receptor
       circuit.

_Volt:_
       The unit of electrical force or potential. The electromotive
       force which, if steadily applied to a conductor whose resistance
       is one ohm, will produce a current of one ampere.

_Voltmeter:_
       An instrument for measuring voltage.

_Watt:_
       Unit of work. It is the rate of work of one ampere flowing under
       a potential of one volt. Seven hundred and forty-six watts
       represent one electrical horsepower.

[Illustration: *Plate VI. DeForest and Marconi Systems.*]




CHAPTER XVIII. THE AMATEUR AND THE WIRELESS LAW. WHAT IT IS; HOW TO
COMPLY; HOW TO SECURE A LICENSE.


On August 13, 1912, Congress enacted a "Wireless Law" to regulate radio
communication. The whole law may be found in the appendix of this book,
but briefly as far as the amateur is concerned it is as follows:

An amateur may not use transmitting apparatus which is sufficiently
powerful to send radio signals across any of the boundaries of the state
in which he is located and which can be detected by a sensitive
receiving set located just beyond the state boundary, nor can he use
apparatus which is powerful enough to interfere with the reception of
signals by others from beyond the state boundaries unless he has a
_license_.

An amateur may receive messages from anywhere at any time without a
license provided that his station is not also fitted with transmitting
apparatus.

In other words if the amateur possesses a receiving outfit only which is
in working order or if he has both transmitter and receptor and the
former is not powerful enough to send signals out of the state in which
he lives, or to interfere with the reception of messages by another when
the messages come from beyond the state boundary a _license_ is
unnecessary.

This is of course somewhat unfair for those living near the center of
large states for they may operate almost as they please with ordinary
instruments with no fear of the signals going beyond the border, while
those living within a few miles of another state must secure a license.

If an amateur has a license he may transmit messages beyond the state
border, but he must not employ a wave length greater than 200 meters or
a power input into the transmitter of more than 1 K.W. without special
permission.

[Illustration: Fig. 148. Experimental Amateur Station of W. Haddon,
Brooklyn, N. Y.]

If the amateur is within five nautical miles of an army or navy station
equipped with radio apparatus his power input must not be more than 1
K.W.

*Complying with Law.*After a license is secured, or rather as a matter
of fact in order to secure it, the wave length must not be greater than
200 meters. In order to secure such a wave length the effective portion
of the aerial cannot usually be made greater than 115 feet in
consideration of the amount which the lead-in, helix and ground wire
add.

[Illustration: Fig. 149. Complete Receiving Outfit Consisting of
Receiving Transformer, Detector, Fixed Condenser, Loading Coil, Two
Variable Condensers, Potentiometer, Battery, Switches, etc.]

Such an aerial will serve well for transmitting purposes, but is too
short for receiving very long distances. If the amateur desires to pick
up long distance messages he must employ two aerials, a short one for
transmitting and a long one for receiving. If it is desirable to use the
long aerial for both transmitting and receiving its wave length may be
brought down to 200 meters or under, while transmitting by placing a
large glass plate condenser of the proper capacity in series with the
aerial. It may be short-circuited with a suitable switch when receiving.

The law also says that the transmitting wave must be pure, and must be
sharply tuned, which means that the wave must be of one length and not,
as is very often the case, composed of two or more waves of different
lengths.

In order to comply with this restriction, the use of an oscillation
helix or loosely coupled helix is necessary. A rotary or quenched gap is
also necessary in place of the ordinary spark gap.

The construction of all three of these instruments is described farther
on.

*How to Obtain a License.*In order to obtain a license send to the
nearest Radio Inspector; Radio Inspectors are stationed at the Custom
Houses at the following cities: Boston, Mass.; New York, N. Y.;
Savannah, Ga.; Baltimore, Md.; Cleveland, Ohio; Chicago, Ill.; Seattle,
Wash.; New Orleans, La.; San Francisco, Cal.; and obtain a copy of The
Wireless Law, 8-6412, The Regulations Governing Radio Communication, The
Berlin International Radio-telegraphic Convention, and the necessary
Application Forms.

Look over the Wireless Law, the Regulations and the Berlin Convention
pamphlet, then fill out Form 756. This is an application for an
operators license.

[Illustration: Fig. 150. Receiving Outfit Consisting of Receiving
Transformer, Fixed Condenser and Detector.]

If the amateur is not already in possession of a certificate of skill as
an operator it will be necessary to find out, from the commandant at the
nearest one of the stations, listed on page 4 of the Regulations as
being the places where examinations are given, on what days the
examinations are held. If the amateur is able to pass the examination,
an _operators license_ will be issued. Then fill out Form 757 and
forward it to the Radio Inspector. If he thinks your station conforms to
the regulations without inspection the license will be issued; if not,
the license will be issued after inspection.

There are no fees to pay in connection with securing any of the
licenses.



APPARATUS REQUIRED IN MANY INSTANCES IN ORDER TO COMPLY WITH THE
WIRELESS LAW.


*OSCILLATION HELIX*

The oscillation helix has almost become a necessity in order to comply
with the regulations of the Wireless Law regarding wave form, except in
those stations where a quenched gap is used.

[Illustration: Fig. 151. Amco Oscillation Helix.]

The wave emitted by many stations is not pure. It is composed usually of
two or three separate waves of different lengths instead of all the
energy being confined to oscillations of one period. It is possible to
tune such a wave in two or more places or "humps," as they are called,
on the tuning coil. It is obvious that a wave possessing such humps
cannot be closely tuned and is liable to interfere with the signals of
another station. This is one of the principal causes of interference.

The reason for this phenomenon is simple. The action of a transmitter is
to first charge a condenser. When the potential of the condenser rises
to sufficient value it discharges across the spark gap and sets up
oscillations in the _closed_ circuit. These oscillations immediately
induce oscillations in the _open_ circuit or aerial system and part of
the energy passes off into the ether as electro-magnetic waves. However,
the oscillations in the _aerial_ system do not immediately die away
after the oscillations in the closed circuit cease during the interim
until the next condenser discharge, but continue to surge and react upon
the dosed circuit to sufficient extent to induce therein currents which
surge back and forth long after the current from the condenser discharge
has died away.

We might call the oscillations due to the condenser discharge _primary
oscillations_ and those induced in the aerial thereby _secondary
oscillations_. Those which are then set up in the closed circuit by the
reaction of the _secondary_ currents are _tertiary_. This third train of
oscillations persist after the secondary currents have died away, and
induce another set of oscillations in the aerial which send out a second
set of electromagnetic waves differing in length from the first.

The oscillations which take place after the initial surge in the closed
and open circuits are naturally somewhat weak. By using an oscillation
helix in which the primary and secondary are separated from each other
it is possible to eliminate the third and fourth trains of oscillations
and all others having a tendency to follow, by placing the circuits
apart so that the weak oscillations are not strong enough* to react
across the intervening space. The immediate oscillations set up by the
condenser discharge are strong enough to act across the space and set up
powerful oscillations in the aerial.

[Illustration: Fig. 152. Details of Oscillation Helix Construction.]

A hot wire ammeter placed in the aerial circuit of a transmitter
employing an oscillation transformer will not indicate as much current
as if placed in the same position in a circuit using an ordinary helix;
but in spite of the fact, a transmitter using an oscillation helix will
send farther because the energy is concentrated in waves of one length.

The construction of one type of oscillation helix has already been
outlined on page 92. The form shown in Fig. 152 has no special
advantages over the other but is preferred by many experimenters.

It is of the "pancake" type, so-called because of the flat form of the
windings which are made in the shape of a spiral of brass ribbon set in
a slotted frame.

The dimensions of the helix are clearly apparent from the drawing. The
primary is composed of seven turns of brass ribbon 1/2 inch wide and
1/16 inch thick. The secondary should have from 10 to 15 turns of ribbon
3/8 x 1/16. The coils may be slid back and forth on the brass rod so
that the distance between them is variable. Connection is made to the
coils by means of suitable clips. A clip similar to that shown on page
92, but made to snap on a flat ribbon instead of a round wire, will
serve the purpose.

*QUENCHED SPARK GAP.*

A "quenched" gap is made up of a number of brass or copper disks
accurately turned to a true surface and separated by mica or rubber
rings about .01 inch thick. The spark discharge takes place in the
air-tight space at the center of the disks, inside of the mica rings.

The quenched gap has several advantages over other forms. It is
practically noiseless and the nuisance of a crashing discharge may be
avoided by its use.

The large surface offered to the spark by the disks cools the spark and
quickly stops the oscillations in the closed circuit, and thereby leaves
the open circuit and aerial system free to vibrate in its own period and
therefore radiates _pure_ waves. By pure wave a wave of one length is
meant.

A quenched gap cannot be used on a set of over 1 K.W. power without
artificial cooling by an air blast.

[Illustration: Fig. 153. Quenched Gap.]

[Illustration: Fig. 154. Quenched Gap.]

Fig. 154 shows an efficient form of quenched gap for use in stations up
to 1 K.W. in power.

The disks are shown in detail in Fig. 155. They are cast out of copper
and then turned perfectly true and smooth in a lathe. After surfacing,
the discharge surface should be heavily silver plated and buffed smooth.

[Illustration: Fig. 155. Details of Disk and Ring.]

The disks are piled on a marble base with a mica ring between each. They
are clamped down by a strong set screw mounted on a heavy brass yoke.
Enough pressure should be brought to bear to force the plates tightly
together and make them air tight.

[Illustration: Fig. 156. Explanatory Drawing of Quenched Gap.]

The number of disks required is governed by the voltage of the charging
condenser. Generally speaking it is one section of .01-inch gap for each
thousand volts delivered by the secondary of the transformer. It is very
important to secure just the proper number of disks. If properly
adjusted, the quenched gap will give one discharge for each alternation
of the current and produce a musical tone.

The quenched gap is placed in the same position in the transmitting
circuit as any other form of gap.

*ROTARY GAPS.*

Rotary gaps are divided into two general classes, the synchronous gap
and the non-synchronous gap.

The former usually consists of one or more stationary electrodes and a
rotating member made like a star wheel with projecting spokes. This
rotary member is attached directly to the shaft of the alternator or
motor generator and arranged so that a spoke always comes opposite a
stationary member at the exact moment that the maximum of potential is
obtained in the condenser. Such an arrangement permits one discharge for
each alternation of the current and produces a pure musical note easily
distinguished in the telephone receivers at a distant station.

In the non-synchronous rotary gap the wheel is driven at a high rate of
speed without any regard to synchronism with the alternations of the
current.

The rotary gap shown in Fig. 157 is of the non-synchronous type.

[Illustration: Fig. 157. Amco Rotary Gap.]

The rotating member is cast from an alloy of equal parts of zinc and
aluminum. It is necessary to first make a wooden pattern from which the
casting may be made. The details of the wheel are shown in Fig. 158. The
casting must be placed in a lathe chuck and turned true. It is mounted
on a hard rubber disk 2 7/8 inches in diameter and 1/4 of an inch thick.
The disk serves to insulate the revolving electrodes from the motor
shaft. The "rotor" is mounted upon the shaft by means of a small brass
bushing which passes through the center of the disk.

[Illustration: Fig. 158. Details of Revolving Parts of Rotary Gap.]

The motor must be well built and capable of running at high speed. A
"Juno" motor will be found very satisfactory. When running free its
speed is about 4500 r.p.m. With the rotor in place the speed is about
3600 r.p.m.

The motor should be mounted on a heavy marble base capable of absorbing
any little vibration that the gap may be subject to when running at high
speed.

The stationary electrodes are made in the same manner as those for an
ordinary gap and consists of two flanged zinc electrodes mounted upon
threaded brass rods supported by two hexagonal standards. The axis of
the electrodes should be the same height above the base as that of the
motor shaft.

The rotor should be carefully balanced so that it is practically free
from vibration by boring small holes in the back face so as to make the
weight on opposite sides equal.

[Illustration: Fig. 159. Details of Rotary Gap.]

The motor may be driven by a battery or from the same source that
supplies the transformer, in series with two or three suitable lamps. A
motor wound to run directly from the 110-volt line or a higher potential
must have its fields wound with very fine wire and is apt to give
trouble through "burn-outs," due to "kick back." When the motor is
operated on batteries or is wound for running in series with a lamp the
danger is lessened.

A rotary gap is placed in the transmitting circuit in the same position
as any other gap. Its use will result in a wonderful increase in the
transmitting range of almost any station, for not only will the amount
of energy passing through the aerial be raised, but the clear musical
tone given off is more plainly distinguishable at a greater distance in
the receiving station than a spark of the ordinary sort.

*"KICK BACK."*

The oscillations taking place in the closed circuit and aerial system of
a wireless transmitter continue to surge after the current in the
condenser has dropped below a certain value, and react upon the primary
winding of the coil or transformer by induction and produce high
voltage, high frequency currents termed "kick back," in wireless
telegraph parlance.

"Kick back," wherever it exists to an appreciable extent, is liable to
damage insulation and cause possible "burn-outs." The "kick-back"
preventers illustrated in the accompanying diagrams will be found an
efficient method of avoiding this danger.

[Illustration: Fig. 160. Methods of Preventing "Kick Back."]

The first method shows an ordinary pressed telephone condenser of about
two microfarads capacity connected directly across the A. C. mains near
the transformer terminals, in series with two 6-ampere fuses. The
condenser is shunted by a small spark gap made of needle points with a
very small space, about .005 of an inch, between them.

The second method is an elaboration of the first and shows two sets of
condensers in series with fuses and bridged by spark gaps with a
"ground" through a third condenser connected between. This second method
is the best and is often used to prevent delicate instruments, such as a
voltmeter, from the effects of "kick back."

A proper "kick-back" preventer is part of the Fire Insurance
Underwriters requirements for a wireless telegraph station.



Receiving Apparatus.


*THE VARIOMETER.*

A variometer is a tuning device in which two coils of wire are placed in
series and connected so that the turns can be made to oppose one
another. One coil is movable and by turning it the currents flowing
through the adjacent coils oppose each other and decrease the
self-induction of the whole and consequently the period of the circuit.

[Illustration: Fig. 161. Variometer.]

The accompanying illustration shows the constructive details of an
efficient form of variometer.

The coils are wound around two cardboard cylinders. One cylinder is 6
inches in diameter and the other 5 inches. Both are 2 inches long. The
large cylinder is wound with twenty-five turns of No. 22 B. S. gauge
single silk covered wire wound in two sections so as to leave a space
3/8 inch wide in the center. The small cylinder is wound in the same
manner with the same size of wire but contains thirty turns so as to
make the length of wire in each of the coils practically equal.

The space in the center of each of the coils allows a supporting rod to
pass through without interfering with the wire. The shaft is a piece of
5/16 _brass_ rod about 7 1/2 inches long. The upper end is provided with
a knob and a pointer. The large coil is mounted on the under side of a
wooden cover made to fit a containing case of the proper size to receive
the variometer and of a style similar to that ordinarily used to enclose
a variable condenser.

The shaft passes through the larger coil, at two points diametrically
opposite, but should not fit tightly. It also passes through the smaller
coil but is fastened to the latter by means of a cross bar so that when
the knob is turned the coil will revolve also. The coils are connected
by means of a piece of braided wire or flexible conductor, long enough
so as not to interfere with the movement of the inner coil.

The outside terminals of the coils terminate in binding posts mounted on
the top of the case. When making a variometer be careful not to employ
any iron or steel in its construction, not even iron screws.

The variometer is placed in the receiving circuit by connecting it in
series with the aerial before it reaches the tuning coil or loose
coupler.

*NEW CRYSTAL DETECTORS.*

*Silicon Detector.*The silicon detector is always interesting because
it was one of the first mineral rectifiers to come into extended use.
The photograph shown below illustrates one of the latest forms of the
silicon detector.

[Illustration: Fig. 162. Silicon Detector.]

The large cup supported by the left-hand standard contacts several
pieces of fused silicon embedded in fusible alloy. The right-hand
standard supports a movable "offset" cup the same as that used on the
Perikon type of Detector. A small piece of _arsenic_ is mounted in this
cup and may be brought to bear against any portion of any of the silicon
crystals.

*Pyron Detector.*The Pyron detector is not new, but the photograph
shows a very simple and efficient form in which a fine wire is brought
to bear against a crystal of iron pyrites mounted in a small cup.

[Illustration: Fig. 163. Pyron Detector.]

*Galena Detector.*Although _galena_ is named in the list of sensitive
minerals on page 132 it has come into such extensive use as a detector
since the first edition of this book to be worthy of special attention.
Galena detectors are often spoken of as "cat-whisker" detectors because
of the long fine wire used to secure a delicate contact with the
mineral.

The mineral is usually placed in a cup and held in position by imbedding
in fusible alloy or clamped with a set screw. The best surface of the
mineral should be selected by testing previous to imbedding it in the
cup. Contact is made with the surface of the mineral by means of a piece
of No. 30 phosphor bronze wire mounted on the end of a short brass rod
fitted with an adjusting screw so that by turning or twisting the
surface of the mineral may be "searched" and the tension varied.

[Illustration: Fig. 164. Galena Detector.]

Such an arrangement is illustrated in Fig. 164. The base is a hard
rubber block 3 3/4 x 1 3/4 x 1/2. The binding posts are of the type
commonly used on electrical instruments. One of the posts is pivoted by
placing a spring washer under the head of the screw which holds the post
to the base. A short piece of brass rod fitted with a hard rubber knob
passes through the wire hole in the post. A piece of No. 30 phosphor
bronze wire is soldered to the end of the rod. By twisting the post and
sliding the rod any portion of the mineral surface may be selected.
Twisting the rod varies the tension of the contact.

The galena detector is connected in the receiving circuit in the same
manner as other detectors of the mineral type.

*THE AUDION.*

*The Audion*is finding favor in many amateur wireless stations, because
of its almost entire lack of adjustment and of the loud clear signals
which it gives even when used for long distance work.

The illustration shows the latest form of audion, the plate and the grid
both being on the same side of the filament.

The filament of an audion is usually lighted by means of a six-volt
storage battery. A small battery rheostat placed in series with the
battery serves to regulate the amount of current flowing through the
filament. Only one filament is used at a time, the other being saved as
a reserve in case the first burns out.

[Illustration: Fig. 165. Audion.]

The higher voltage necessary to operate an audion is supplied by a
battery consisting of fifteen flashlight batteries, each flashlight
battery being composed of three separate cells. The batteries are
connected to an eight-point switch so that throwing the switch on the
first point will connect five sets of batteries. The second point places
five more in circuit and each additional point one set only. It is also
a good plan to connect a four-point switch and three separate cells of
battery in series with the eight-point switch so that they may be added
to the circuit one at a time and the potential varied more closely than
the steps on the eight-point switch permit. The maximum voltage of such
a battery is approximately 56 volts.

The diagram in Fig. 166 shows exactly how an audion is connected. The
wires _A_ and _B_ are the terminals leading to the tuning coil or loose
coupler. It is not necessary that the telephone receivers used with an
audion be wound to a high resistance in order to secure good results.

[Illustration: Fig. 166. Audion Circuit.]

The audion is placed in operation by turning the rheostat until the
filament lights brightly. Then adjust the voltage of the high potential
battery until the signals are clearest. If the voltage is too high the
audion will become filled with a bluish light and the voltage should be
immediately reduced. The signals will be loudest when the filament is
brilliantly lighted. No more current should be passed through the
filament than is necessary to render the signals plain, for if "forced"
its life will be limited to only a few hours.

[Illustration: Fig. 167. Rotary Variable Condenser.]




                              *APPENDIX.*

                           [PUBLIC No. 264.]

                               [S. 6412.]

                An Act to Regulate Radio Communication.

_Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United
States of America in Congress assembled._ That a person, company, or
corporation within the jurisdiction of the United States shall not use
or operate any apparatus for radio communication as a means of
commercial intercourse among the several States, or with foreign
nations, or upon any vessel of the United States engaged in interstate
or foreign commerce, or for the transmission of radiograms or signals
the effect of which extends beyond the jurisdiction of the State or
Territory in which the same are made, or where interference would be
caused thereby with the receipt of messages or signals from beyond the
jurisdiction of the said State or Territory, except under and in
accordance with a license, revocable for cause, in that behalf granted
by the Secretary of Commerce and Labor upon application therefor; but
nothing in this Act shall be construed to apply to the transmission and
exchange of radiograms or signals between points situated in the same
State: _Provided_, That the effect thereof shall not extend beyond the
jurisdiction of the said State or interfere with the reception of
radiograms or signals from beyond said jurisdiction; and a license shall
not be required for the transmission or exchange of radiograms or
signals by or on behalf of the Government of the United States, but
every Government station on land or sea shall have special call letters
designated and published in the list of radio stations of the United
States by the Department of Commerce and Labor. Any person, company, or
corporation that shall use or operate any apparatus for radio
communication in violation of this section, or knowingly aid or abet
another person, company, or corporation in so doing, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be punished by
a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, and the apparatus or device
so unlawfully used and operated may be adjudged forfeited to the United
States.

SEC. 2. That every such license shall be in such form as the Secretary
of Commerce and Labor shall determine and shall contain the
restrictions, pursuant to this Act, on and subject to which the license
is granted; that every such license shall be issued only to citizens of
the United States or Porto Rico or to a company incorporated under the
laws of some State or Territory or of the United States or Porto Rico,
and shall specify the ownership and location of the station in which
said apparatus shall be used and other particulars for its
identification and to enable its range to be estimated; shall state the
purpose of the station, and, in case of a station in actual operation at
the date of passage of this Act, shall contain the statement that
satisfactory proof has been furnished that it was actually operating on
the above-mentioned date; shall state the wave length or the wave
lengths authorized for use by the station for the prevention of
interference and the hours for which the station is licensed for work;
and shall not be construed to authorize the use of any apparatus for
radio communication in any other station than that specified. Every such
license shall be subject to the regulations contained herein, and such
regulations as may be established from time to time by authority of this
Act or subsequent Acts and treaties of the United States. Every such
license shall provide that the President of the United States in time of
war or public peril or disaster may cause the closing of any station for
radio communication and the removal therefrom of all radio apparatus, or
may authorize the use or control of any such station or apparatus by any
department of the Government, upon just compensation to the owners.

SEC. 3. That every such apparatus shall at all times while in use and
operation as aforesaid be in charge or under the supervision of a person
or persons licensed for that purpose by the Secretary of Commerce and
Labor. Every person so licensed who in the operation of any radio
apparatus shall fail to observe and obey regulations contained in or
made pursuant to this Act or subsequent Acts or treaties of the United
States, or any one of them, or who shall fail to enforce obedience
thereto by an unlicensed person while serving under his supervision, in
addition to the punishments and penalties herein prescribed, may suffer
the suspension of the said license for a period to be fixed by the
Secretary of Commerce and Labor not exceeding one year. It shall be
unlawful to employ any unlicensed person or for any unlicensed person to
serve in charge or in supervision of the use and operation of such
apparatus, and any person violating this provision shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of
not more than one hundred dollars or imprisonment for not more than two
months, or both, in the discretion of the court, for each and every such
offense: _Provided_, That in case of emergency the Secretary of Commerce
and Labor may authorize a collector of customs to issue a temporary
permit, in lieu of a license, to the operator on a vessel subject to the
radio ship Act of June twenty-fourth, nineteen hundred and ten.

SEC. 4. That for the purpose of preventing or minimizing interference
with communication between stations in which such apparatus is operated,
to facilitate radio communication, and to further the prompt receipt of
distress signals, said private and commercial stations shall be subject
to the regulations of this section. These regulations shall be enforced
by the Secretary of Commerce and Labor through the collectors of customs
and other officers of the Government as other regulations herein
provided for.

The Secretary of Commerce and Labor may, in his discretion, waive the
provisions of any or all of these regulations when no interference of
the character above mentioned can ensue.

The Secretary of Commerce and Labor may grant special temporary licenses
to stations actually engaged in conducting experiments for the
development of the science of radio communication, or the apparatus
pertaining thereto, to carry on special tests, using any amount of power
or any wave lengths, at such hours and under such conditions as will
insure the least interference with the sending or receipt of commercial
or Government radiograms, of distress signals and radiograms, or with
the work of other stations.

In these regulations the naval and military stations shall be understood
to be stations on land.

                              REGULATIONS.

                          NORMAL WAVE LENGTH.

First. Every station shall be required to designate certain definite
wave length as the normal sending and receiving wave length of the
station. This wave length shall not exceed six hundred meters or it
shall exceed one thousand six hundred meters. Every coastal station open
to general public service shall at all times be ready to receive
messages of such wave lengths as are required by the Berlin convention.
Every ship station, except as hereinafter provided, and every coast
station open to general public service shall be prepared to use two
sending wave lengths, one of three hundred meters and one of six hundred
meters, as required by the international convention in force:
_Provided_, That the Secretary of Commerce and Labor may, in his
discretion, change the limit of wave length reservation made by
regulations first and second to accord with any international agreement
to which the United States is a party.

                          OTHER WAVE LENGTHS.

Second. In addition to the normal sending wave length all stations,
except as provided hereinafter in these regulations, may use other
sending wave lengths: _Provided_, That they do not exceed six hundred
meters or that they do exceed one thousand six hundred meters: _Provided
further_, That the character of the waves emitted conforms to the
requirements of regulations third and fourth following.

                          USE OF A "PURE WAVE"

Third. At all stations if the sending apparatus, to be referred to
hereinafter as the "transmitter," is of such a character that the energy
is radiated in two or more wave lengths, more or less sharply defined,
as indicated by a sensitive wave meter, the energy in no one of the
lesser waves shall exceed ten per centum of that in the greatest.

                         USE OF A "SHARP WAVE."

Fourth. At all stations the logarithmic decrement per complete
oscillation in the wave trains emitted by the transmitter shall not
exceed two-tenths, except when sending distress signals or signals and
messages relating thereto.

                    USE OF "STANDARD DISTRESS WAVE."

Fifth. Every station on shipboard shall be prepared to send distress
calls on the normal wave length designated by the international
convention in force, except on vessels of small tonnage unable to have
plants insuring that wave length.

                          SIGNAL OF DISTRESS.

Sixth. The distress call used shall be the international signal of
distress: dot dot dot, dash dash dash, dot dot dot.

         USE OF "BROAD INTERFERING WAVE" FOR DISTRESS SIGNALS.

Seventh. When sending distress signals, the transmitter of a station on
shipboard may be tuned in such a manner as to create a maximum of
interference with a maximum of radiation.

               DISTANCE REQUIREMENT FOR DISTRESS SIGNALS.

Eighth. Every station on shipboard, wherever practicable, shall be
prepared to send distress signals of the character specified in
regulations fifth and sixth with sufficient power to enable them to be
received by day over sea a distance of one hundred nautical miles by a
shipboard station equipped with apparatus for both sending and receiving
equal in all essential particulars to that of the station first
mentioned.

                         FOR DISTRESS SIGNALS.

Ninth. All stations are required to give absolute priority to signals
and radiograms relating to ships in distress; to cease all sending on
hearing a distress signal; and, except when engaged in answering or
aiding the ship in distress, to refrain from sending until all signals
and radiograms relating thereto are completed.

           REDUCED POWER FOR SHIPS NEAR A GOVERNMENT STATION.

Tenth. No station on shipboard, when within fifteen nautical miles of a
naval or military station, shall use a transformer input exceeding one
kilowatt, nor, when within five nautical miles of such a station, a
transformer input exceeding one-half kilowatt, except for sending
signals of distress, or signals or radiograms relating thereto.

                          INTERCOMMUNICATION.

Eleventh. Each shore station open to general public service between the
cost and vessels at sea shall be bound to exchange radiograms with any
similar shore station and with any ship station without distinction of
the radio systems adopted by such stations, respectively, and each
station on shipboard shall be bound to exchange radiograms with any
other station on shipboard without distinction of the radio systems
adopted by each station respectively.

It shall be the duty of each such shore station, during the hours it is
in operation, to listen in at intervals of not less than fifteen minutes
and for a period not less than two minutes, with the receiver tuned to
receive messages of three hundred meter wave lengths.

                           DIVISION OF TIME.

Twelfth. At important seaports and at all other places where naval or
military and private or commercial shore stations operate in such close
proximity that interference with the work of naval and military stations
can not be avoided by the enforcement of the regulations contained in
the foregoing regulations concerning wave lengths and character of
signals emitted, such private or commercial shore stations as do
interfere with the reception of signals by the naval and military
stations concerned shall not use their transmitters during the first
fifteen minutes of each hour, local standard time. The Secretary of
Commerce and Labor may, on the recommendation of the department
concerned, designate the station or stations which may be required to
observe this division of time.

            GOVERNMENT STATIONS TO OBSERVE DIVISION OF TIME.

Thirteenth. The naval or military stations for which the above mentioned
division of time may be established shall transmit signals or radiograms
only during the first fifteen minutes of each hour, local standard time,
except in case of signals or radiograms relating to vessels in distress,
as hereinbefore provided.

                       USE OF UNNECESSARY POWER.

Fourteenth. In all circumstances, except in case of signals or
radiograms relating to vessels in distress, all stations shall use the
minimum amount of energy necessary to carry out any communication
desired.

               GENERAL RESTRICTIONS ON PRIVATE STATIONS.

Fifteenth. No private or commercial station not engaged in the
transaction of bona fide commercial business by radio communication or
in experimentation in connection with the development and manufacture of
radio apparatus for commercial purposes shall use a transmitting wave
length exceeding two hundred meters, or a transformer input exceeding
one kilowatt, except by special authority of the Secretary of Commerce
and Labor contained in the license of the station: _Provided_, That the
owner or operator of a station of the character mentioned in this
regulation shall not be liable for a violation of the requirements of
the third or fourth regulations to the penalties of one hundred dollars
or twenty-five dollars, respectively, provided in this section unless
the person maintaining or operating such station shall have been
notified in writing that the said transmitter has been found, upon tests
conducted by the Government, to be so adjusted as to violate the said
third and fourth regulations, and opportunity has been given to said
owner or operator to adjust said transmitter in conformity with said
regulations.

     SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS IN THE VICINITIES OF GOVERNMENT STATIONS.

Sixteenth. No station of the character mentioned in regulation fifteenth
situated within five nautical miles of a naval or military station shall
use a transmitting wave length exceeding two hundred meters or a
transformer input exceeding one-half kilowatt.

       SHIP STATIONS TO COMMUNICATE WITH NEAREST SHORE STATIONS.

Seventeenth. In general, the shipboard stations shall transmit their
radiograms to the nearest shore station. A sender on board a vessel
shall, however, have the right to designate the shore station through
which he desires to have his radiograms transmitted. If this can not be
done, the wishes of the sender are to be complied with only if the
transmission can be effected without interfering with the service of
other stations.

    LIMITATIONS FOR FUTURE INSTALLATIONS IN VICINITIES OF GOVERNMENT
                               STATIONS.

Eighteenth. No station on shore not in actual operation at the date of
the passage of this Act shall be licensed for the transaction of
commercial business by radio communication within fifteen nautical miles
of the following naval or military stations, to wit: Arlington,
Virginia; Key West, Florida; San Juan, Porto Rico; North Head and
Tatoosh Island, Washington; San Diego, California; and those established
or which may be established in Alaska and in the Canal Zone; and the
head of the department having control of such Government stations shall,
so far as is consistent with the transaction of governmental business,
arrange for the transmission and receipt of commercial radiograms under
the provisions of the Berlin convention of nineteen hundred and six and
future international conventions or treaties to which the United States
may be a party, at each of the stations above referred to, and shall fix
the rates therefor, subject to control of such rates by Congress. At
such stations and wherever and whenever shore stations open for general
public business between the coast and vessels at sea under the
provisions of the Berlin convention of nineteen hundred and six and
future international conventions and treaties to which the United States
may be a party shall not be so established as to insure a constant
service day and night without interruption, and in all localities
wherever or whenever such service shall not be maintained by a
commercial shore station within one hundred nautical miles of a naval
radio station, the Secretary of the Navy shall, so far as is consistent
with the transaction of governmental business, open naval radio stations
to the general public business described above, and shall fix rates for
such service, subject to control of such rates by Congress. The receipts
from such radiograms shall be covered into the Treasury as miscellaneous
receipts.

                          SECRECY OF MESSAGES.

Nineteenth. No person or persons engaged in or having knowledge of the
operation of any station or stations shall divulge or publish the
contents of any messages transmitted or received by such station, except
to the person or persons to whom the same may be directed, or their
authorized agent, or to another station employed to forward such message
to its destination, unless legally required so to do by the court of
competent jurisdiction or other competent authority. Any person guilty
of divulging or publishing any message, except as herein provided,
shall, on conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more than
two hundred and fifty dollars or imprisonment for a period of not
exceeding three months, or both fine and imprisonment, in the discretion
of the court.

                               PENALTIES.

For violation of any of these regulations, subject to which a license
under sections one and two of this Act may be issued, the owner of the
apparatus shall be liable to a penalty of one hundred dollars, which may
be reduced or remitted by the Secretary of Commerce and Labor, and for
repeated violations of any of such regulations, the license may be
revoked.

For violation of any of these regulations, except as provided in
regulation nineteenth, subject to which a license under section three of
this Act may be issued, the operator shall be subject to a penalty of
twenty-five dollars, which may be reduced or remitted by the Secretary
of Commerce and Labor, and for repeated violations of any such
regulations, the license shall be suspended or revoked.

SEC. 5. That every license granted under the provisions of this Act for
the operation or use of apparatus for radio communication shall
prescribe that the operator thereof shall not wilfully or maliciously
interfere with any other radio communication. Such interference shall be
deemed a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof the owner or operator,
or both, shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred
dollars or imprisonment for not to exceed one year, or both.

SEC. 6. That the expression "radio communication" as used in this Act
means any system of electrical communication by telegraphy or telephony
without the aid of any wire connecting the points from and at which the
radiograms, signals, or other communications are sent or received.

SEC. 7. That a person, company, or corporation within the jurisdiction
of the United States shall not knowingly utter or transmit, or cause to
be uttered or transmitted, any false or fraudulent distress signal or
call or false or fraudulent signal, call, or other radiogram of any
kind. The penalty for so uttering or transmitting a false or fraudulent
distress signal or call shall be a fine of not more than two thousand
five hundred dollars or imprisonment for not more than five years, or
both, in the discretion of the court, for each and every such offense,
and the penalty for so uttering or transmitting, or causing to be
uttered or transmitted, any other false or fraudulent signal, call, or
other radiogram shall be a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or
imprisonment for not more than two years, or both, in the discretion of
the court, for each and every such offense.

SEC. 8. That a person, company, or corporation shall not use or operate
any apparatus for radio communication on a foreign ship in territorial
waters of the United States otherwise than in accordance with the
provisions of sections four and seven of this Act and so much of section
five as imposes a penalty for interference. Save as aforesaid, nothing
in this Act shall apply to apparatus for radio communication on any
foreign ship.

SEC. 9. That the trial of any offense under this Act shall be in the
district in which it is committed, or if the offense is committed upon
the high seas or out of the jurisdiction of any particular State or
district the trial shall be in the district where the offender may be
found or into which he shall be first brought.

SEC. 10. That this Act shall not apply to the Phillippine Islands.

SEC. 11. That this Act shall take effect and be in force on and after
four months from its passage.


Approved, August 13, 1912.




                             LIST OF WORKS

                                   ON

                           ELECTRICAL SCIENCE

                       PUBLISHED AND FOR SALE BY

                        D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY,

                       *25 Park Place, New York.*

*ABBOTT, A. V. The Electrical Transmission of Energy.*
       A Manual for the Design of Electrical Circuits. _Fifth Edition,
       enlarged and rewritten._ With many Diagrams, Engravings and
       Folding Plates. 8vo., cloth, 675 pp Net, $5.00

*ARNOLD, E. Armature Windings of Direct-Current Dynamos.*
       Extension and Application of a general Winding Rule. Translated
       from the original German by Francis B. DeCress. Illustrated. 8vo.
       cloth, 124 pp $2.00

*ASHE, S. W. Electricity Experimentally and Practically Applied.*
       _Second Edition._ 422 illustrations. 12mo., cloth, 375 pp. Net,
       $2.00

*ASHE, S. W., and KEILEY, J. D. Electric Railways Theoretically and
Practically Treated.*
       Illustrated. 12mo., cloth.

*Vol. I. Rolling Stock.*
       _Second Edition._ 285 pp Net, $2.50

*Vol. II. Substations and Distributing Systems.*
       296 pp Net, $2. 50

*ATKINSON, A. A. Electrical and Magnetic Calculations.*
       For the use of Electrical Engineers and others interested in the
       Theory and Application of Electricity and Magnetism. _Fourth
       Edition_, revised Illustrated. 12mo, cloth, 310 pp Net, $1.50

*ATKINSON, PHILIP. The Elements of Dynamic Electricity and Magnetism.*
       _Fourth Edition._ Illustrated. 12mo., cloth, 405 pp. $2.00

  - *Elements of Electric Lighting,* including Electric Generation,
    Measurement, Storage, and Distribution. _Tenth Edition_, fully
    revised and new matter added. Illustrated. 12mo., cloth, 280 pp
    $1.50
  - *Power Transmitted by Electricity and Applied by the Electric
    Motor,* including Electric Railway Construction. Illustrated.
    _Fourth Edition_, fully revised and new matter added. 12mo., cloth,
    241 pp. $2.00

*AUSTIN, E. Single-Phase Electric Railways.*
       346 illustrations 8 x 11, cloth, 308 pp Net, $5.00

*AYRTON, HERTHA. The Electric Arc.*
       Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 479 pp Net, $5.00

*BAKER, J. T. The Telegraphic Transmission of Photographs.*
       63 illustrations. 12mo., cloth, 155 pp Net, $1.25

*BARHAM, G. B. Development of the Incandescent Electric Lamp.*
       25 illustrations, 2 plates, 5 x 8 cloth. 206 pp $2.00

*BEDELL, FREDERICK. Direct and Alternating Current Manual.*
       With directions for testing and a discussion of the theory of
       electrical apparatus. _Second Edition, greatly enlarged_.
       Assisted by C. A. Pierce. Illustrated. 6 x 9, cloth, 373 pp Net,
       $2.00

*BLAINE, ROBERT G. The Calculus and Its Applications.*
       A practical treatise for beginners especially engineering
       students. 79 illustrations. 12mo., cloth, 330 pp Net, $1.50

*BONNEY, G. E. The Electro-Platers Hand Book.*
       A Manual for Amateurs and Young Students of Electro-Metallurgy.
       _Fifth Edition, enlarged._ 61 Illustrations. 12mo., cloth, 208 pp
       $1.20

*BOTTONE, S. R. Magnetos For Automobilists; How Made and How Used*
       A handbook of practical instruction on the manufacture and
       adaptation of the magneto to the needs of the motorist. _Second
       Edition, enlarged_. 52 illustrations. 12mo., cloth, 118 pp Net,
       $1.00

*BROADFOOT, S. K. Motors, Secondary Batteries and Accessory Apparatus.*
       16 illustrations. 16mo., cloth. 100pp. (Installation Manuals
       Series) Net, 0.75

*BROUGHTON, H. H. Electric Canes.*
       Their design, construction and application. 600 illustrations and
       plates. 120 tables, 6 x 9, cloth, 848 pp Net, $9.00

*CHILD, C. D. Electric Arcs.*
       Experiments upon arcs between different electrodes in various
       environments and their explanation. 58 illustrations. 5 x 7,
       cloth, 203 pp Net, $2.00

*COLLIS, A. G. High and Low Tension Switchgear Design.*
       94 illustrations and folding plates, 6 x 9, cloth, 233 pp Net,
       $3.50

  - *Switchgear and The Control of Electric Circuits.* 47 illustrations.
    4 1/2 x 6 1/2, cloth, 85 pp. (Installation Manuals Series) Net, 0.50

*COMSTOCK, D. F., and TROLAND, L. T. The Nature of Matter and
Electricity.*
       An outline of modern views. Illustrated. 5 x 7, cloth, 200 pp
       Net, $2.00

*COOPER, W. R. Primary Batteries: their Theory, Construction, and Use*
       _New Edition in Press_

*CRAIG, J. W., and WOODWARD, W. P. Questions and Answers About
Electrical Apparatus.*
       Third edition revised and enlarged. Illustrated. 4 x 6 Leather,
       256 pp Net, $1.50

*CRAMP, W. Continuous Current Machine Design.*
       137 illustration. 8vo., cloth, 240 pp Net, $2.50

*CREED Y, F. Single-Phase Commutator Motors.*
       98 illustrations, 6 x 9, cloth, 120 pp Net, $2.00

*CROCKER, F. B. Electric Lighting.*
       A Practical Exposition of the Art for the use of Electricians,
       Students, and others interested in the Installation or Operation
       of Electric Lighting Plants.

  - *Vol. I. The Generating Plant*. _Seventh Edition, entirely revised_.
    Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 482 pp $3.00
  - *Vol. II. Distributing System and Lamps.* _Sixth Edition_.
    Illustrated 8vo., cloth, 505 pp.

*CROCKER, F. B., and ARENDT, M. Electric Motors: Their Action, Control,
and Application.*
       _Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged_. 169 illustrations. 6 1/4
       x 9 1/4, cloth, 315 pp Net, $2.50

*CROCKER, F. B., and WHEELER, S. S. The Management of Electrical
Machinery.*
       Being a _thoroughly revised and rewritten edition_ of the
       authors "Practical Management of Dynamos and Motors." _Eighth
       Edition._ Illustrated. 16mo., cloth, 232 pp Net, $1.00

*CUSHING, H. C., Jr. Standard Wiring for Electric Light and Power*
       Illustrated. 16mo., leather, 156 pp $1.00

*CUSHING, H. C., Jr. and HARRISON, N. Central Station Management.*
       5 1/2 x 7 1/4 cloth, 417 pp Net, $2.00

*DAVIES, F. H. Electric Power and Traction.* Illustrated. 8vo., cloth
       293 pp. (Van Nostrands Westminster Series.) Net, $2.00

  - *Foundations and Machinery Fixing.* 52 illustrations. 16mo., cloth,
    146 pp. (Installations Manuals Series) Net, $1.00

*DEL MAR, W. A. Electric Power Conductors.*
       _Second edition revised._ 69 illustrations. 5 1/2 x 8, cloth, 330
       pp Net, $2.00

*DEVEY, R. G. Mill and Factory Wiring.*
       126 illustrations. 16mo., cloth, 209 pp. (Installation Manuals
       Series) Net, $1.00

*DINGER, Lieut. H. C. Handbook for the Care and Operation of Naval
Machinery.*
       _Second Edition._ 124 Illustrations. 16mo., cloth, 302 pp Net,
       $2.00

*DUNCAN, W. G. and PENMAN, D. Electrical Equipment of Collieries.*
       157 illustrations, 6 1/2 x 8 3/4, cloth, 329 pp Net, $4.00

*DWIGHT, H. B. Transmission Line Formulas for Electrical Engineers and
Engineering Students.*
       27 illustrations. 2 folding plates, 12mo, cloth, 143 pp Net,
       $2.00

*DYNAMIC ELECTRICITY:*
       Its Modern Use and Measurement, chiefly in its application to
       Electric Lighting and Telegraphy, including: 1. Some Points in
       Electric Lighting, by Dr. John Hopkinson. 2. On the Treatment of
       Electricity for Commercial Purposes, by J. N. Shoolbred. 3.
       Electric-Light Arithmetic, by R. E. Day, M.E. _Fourth Edition._
       Illustrated. 16mo., boards, 166 pp. (No. 71 Van Nostrands
       Science Series.) 50 cents

*ECK, J. Light, Radiation and Illumination.*
       Translated from the German of Paul Hogner. 59 illustrations. 5
       1/2 x 8, cloth, 100 pp. Net, $2.50

*ECCLES, W. H. Wireless Telegraphy and Telephony.*
       Illustrated. 5 x 8 1/2 half leather, 418 pp Net, $4.50

*EDDY, L. C. Laboratory Manual of Alternating Currents.*
       21 illustrations, 5 1/2 x 8, cloth, 26 pp Net, 50 cents

*EDLER, R. Switches and Switchgear.*
       Translated by Ph. Laubach. 335 illustrations. 6 1/2 x 9, cloth,
       412 pp Net, $4.00

*EDGCUMBE, K. Industrial Electrical Measuring Instruments.*
       Illustrated. 8 vo., cloth, 227 pp.

*ENGINEERING AS A CAREER.*
       By Prominent Engineers. Edited by C. E. Drayer and F. H. Newell.
       5 1/4 x 7 1/2, 226 pp. Paper 75 cents, cloth $1.00

*EWING, J. A. Magnetic Induction in Iron and other Metals.*
       _Third Edition, revised_. Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 393 pp Net,
       $4.00

*FISHER, H. K. C., and DARBY, W. C. Students Guide to Submarine Cable
Testing.*
       _Fourth Edition, enlarged._ Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 252 pp Net,
       $3.50

*FLEMING, J. A., Prof. The Alternate-Current Transformer in Theory and
Practice.*

*Vol. I.: The Induction of Electric Currents.*
       _Fifth Issue._ Illustrated. 5vo., cloth, 641 pp: Net, $5.00

*Vol. II.: The Utilization of Induced Currents.*
       _Third Issue._ Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 587 pp Net, $5.00

  - *Propagation of Electric Currents in Telephone and Telegraph
    Conductors.* Illustrated. 6 1/2 x 9 1/2, cloth, 323 pp Net, $3.00
  - *Handbook for the Electrical Laboratory and Testing Room.* Two
    Volumes. Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 1160 pp. Each vol Net, $5.00

*FOSTER, H. A. With the Collaboration of Eminent Specialists. Electrical
Engineers Pocket Book.*
       A handbook of useful data for Electricians and Electrical
       Engineers. With innumerable Tables, Diagrams, and Figures. The
       most complete book of its kind ever published, treating of the
       latest and best Practice in Electrical Engineering. _Seventh
       Edition, completely revised and enlarged._ Fully Illustrated.
       Pocket Size. Leather. Thumb Indexed. 1636 pp $5.00

  - *Engineering Valuation of Public Utilities and Factories.* 50 blank
    forms. 6 x 9, cloth, 361 pp Net, $3.00
  - *Electrical Cost Data, Estimates and Working Tables.* _In Press_

*FOWLE, F. F. The Protection of Railroads from Overhead Transmission
Line Crossings.*
       35 illustrations. 12mo., cloth, 76 pp Net, $1.50.

*FREUDEMACHER, P. W. Electrical Mining Installations.*
       36 illustrations. 16mo., cloth, 192 pp. (Installation Manuals
       Series) Net, $1.00

*FRITH, J. Alternating Current Design.*
       27 illustrations. 6 x 9, cloth, 131 pp Net, $2.00

*GARRARD, C. C. Electric Switch and Controlling Gear.*
       423 illustrations, 5 3/4 x 8 3/4, cloth, 656 pp Net, $6.00

*GANT, L. W. Elements of Electric Traction for Motormen and Others.*
       Illustrated with Diagrams. 8vo., cloth, 217 pp Net, $2.00

*GEAR, H. B. and WILLIAMS, P. F. Electric Central Station Distribution
Systems. Their Design and Construction.*
       _Second Edition, revised and enlarged_. 187 illustrations. 5 1/2
       x 7 1/2, cloth, 455 pp Net, 3.50

*GERHARDI, C. H. W. Electricity Meters; their Construction and
Management.*
       A practical manual for engineers and students. Illustrated. 8vo.,
       cloth, 337 pp Net, $4.00

*GOLDSMITH, RUDOLF. The Alternating Current Commutator Motor. The
Leakage of Induction Motors.*
       In one volume. 247 illustrations. 5 1/4 x 8 3/4, cloth Net, $3.00

*GORE, GEORGE. The Art of Electrolytic Separation of Metals (Theoretical
and Practical).*
       Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 295 pp Net $3.50

*GROTH, L. A. Welding and Cutting Metals by Aid of Gases or
Electricity.*
       124 illustrations. 8 vo., cloth, 280 pp. (Van Nostrands
       Westminister Series) Net, $2.00

*HALLER, G. F. and CUNNINGHAM, E. T. The Tesla High Frequency Coil; its
construction and uses.*
       12mo., cloth, 56 illustrations, 130 pp Net, $1.25

*HASKINS, C. H. The Galvanometer and its Uses. A Manual for Electricians
and Students.*
       _Fifth Edition, revised_. Illustrated. 16mo., morocco, 75 pp
       $1.50

*HAUSMANN, E. Telegraph Engineering. A Manual for Practicing Telegraph,
Engineers and Engineering Students.*
       192 Illustrations. cloth, 416 pp Net, $3.00

*HAY, ALFRED. An Introductory Course of Continuous-Current Engineering.*
       Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 327 pp Net, $2.50

*HAYES, H. V. Public Utilities, Their Cost New and Depreciation.*
       5 3/4 x 8 1/2, cloth, 275 pp Net, $2.00

  - *Public Utilities; Their Fair Present Value and Return.* 5 1/2 x 8
    1/2, cloth, 200 pp Net, $2.00

*HEATHER, H. J. Electrical Engineering for Mechanical and Mining
Engineers.*
       183 illustrations. 5 x 8, cloth, 344 pp Net, $3.50

*HEAVISIDE, O. Electromagnetic Theory. Two Volumes with Many Diagrams.*
       8vo., cloth, 1006 pp. Each Vol Net, $5.00

*Vol. III.* 529 pp Net, $7.50

*HOBART, H. M. Heavy Electrical Engineering.*
       Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 338 pp Net, $4.50

  - *Design of Static Transformers.* 101 illustrations. 6 x 9, cloth,
    189 pp Net, $2.00
  - *Electricity. A text-book designed in particular for engineering
    students.* 115 illustrations. 43 tables. 8vo.. cloth, 266 pp, Net,
    $2.00
  - *Electric Trains.* 88 illustrations. 8vo., cloth, 220 pp Net, $2.50
  - *Electric Propulsion of Ships.* 44 illustrations. 8vo., cloth, 167
    pp. Net, $2.00

*HOBBS, W. R. P. The Arithmetic of Electrical Measurements.*
       With numerous examples, fully worked. _Sixteenth Edition, revised
       and edited with six additional chapters by A. R. Palmer._ 12mo.
       cloth, 126 pp 50 cents.

*HOUSTOUN, R. A. Studies in Light Production.*
       22 illustrations. 5 3/4 x 8 3/4, cloth, 120 pp Net, $2.00

*HUTCHINSON, R. W., Jr. Long-Distance Electric Power Transmission:*
       Being a Treatise on the Hydro-Electric Generation of Energy; Its
       Transformation, Transmission, and Distribution. _Second Edition._
       Illustrated. 12mo., cloth, 350 pp Net, $3.00

  - *and THOMAS, W. D. Electricity in Mining.* Being a theoretical and
    practical treatise on the construction, operation and maintenance of
    electrical mining machinery. 12mo., cloth _In Press_

*INCANDESCENT ELECTRIC LIGHTING.*
       A Practical Description of the Edison System, by H. Latimer. To
       which is added: The Design and Operation of Incandescent
       Stations, by C. J. Field; A Description of the Edison Electrolyte
       Meter, by A. E. Kennelly; and a Paper on the Maximum Efficiency
       of Incandescent Lamps, by T. W. Howell. _Fifth Edition._
       Illustrated. 16mo., cloth, 140 pp. (No. 57 Van Nostrands Science
       Series.) 50 cents

*INDUCTION COILS: How Made and How Used.*
       _Eleventh Edition_. Illustrated. 16mo., cloth, 123 pp. (No. 53
       Van Nostrands Science Series.) 50 cents

*JEHL, FRANCIS. The Manufacture of Carbons for Electric Lighting and
other purposes.*
       Illustrated with numerous Diagrams, Tables, and Folding Plates.
       8vo., cloth, 232 pp Net, $4.00

*JOHNSON, J. H. Arc Lamps and Accessory Apparatus.*
       20 illustrations. 16mo., cloth, 135 pp. (Installation Manuals
       Series) Net, 75 cents.

*JOHNSON, T. M. Ship Wiring and Fitting.*
       47 illustrations. 16mo., cloth, 92 pp. (Installation Manuals
       Series) Net, 75 cents.

*JONES, HARRY C. The Electrical Nature of Matter and Radioactivity.*
       _Third Edition, revised._ 5 1/2 x 8 1/2, cloth, 218 pp Net, $2.00

*KAPP, GISBERT. Alternate-Current Machinery.*
       Illustrated. 16mo., cloth, 190 pp. (No. 96 Van Nostrands Science
       Series) 50 cents

*KAPPER, F. Overhead Transmission Lines and Distributing Circuits.*
       297 illustrations. 2 plates, 7 1/4 x 10, cloth, 310 pp Net, $4.00

*KENNEDY, R. Electrical Installations of Electric Light, Power, and
Traction Machinery.*
       Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 5 vols. The set $15.00. Each $3.50

*KENNELLY, A. E. Theoretical Elements of Electro-Dynamic Machinery.*
       Vol. I. Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 90 pp $1.50

*KERSHAW, J. B. C. The Electric Furnace in Iron and Steel Production.*
       Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 74 pp Net, $1.50

  - *Electrometallurgy.* Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 303 pp. (Van
    Nostrands Westminster Series.) Net, $2.00

*KINZBRUNNER, C. Continuous-Current Armatures; their Winding and
Construction.*
       79 Illustrations. 8vo., cloth, 80 pp Net, $1.50

  - *Alternate-Current Windings; their Theory and Construction.* 89
    Illustrations. 8vo., cloth, 80 pp Net, $1.50
  - *The Testing of Alternating Current Machines in Laboratories and
    Test Rooms.* A practical work for students and engineers. Vol I.
    General Tests; Transformers, Alternators. 141 illustrations. 5 1/2 x
    8 3/4, cloth, 164 pp Net, $2.00

*KLINGENBERG, G. Large Electric Power Stations.*
       Their design and construction, with examples of existing
       stations. 180 illustrations, 7 plates, 7 x 10, cloth, 260 pp Net,
       $5.00

*KOESTER, F. Hydroelectric Developments and Engineering.*
       A practical and theoretical treatise on the development, design,
       construction, equipment and operation of hydroelectric
       transmission plants. _Second Edition_. 500 illustrations. 4to.,
       cloth, 475 pp. Net, $5.00

  - *Steam-Electric Power Plants.* A practical treatise on the design of
    central light and power stations and their economical construction
    and operation. Second Edition. Fully Illustrated. 4to., cloth 455 pp
    Net, $5.00

*LANCASTER, M. Electric Cooking, Heating and Cleaning.*
       Edited by W. E. Lancaster, American Edition by S. L. Coles, 305
       illustrations, 6 x 8 1/2, cloth 340 pp Net, $1.00

*LARNER, E. T. The Principles of Alternating Currents for Students of
Electrical Engineering.* Illustrated with Diagrams. 12mo., cloth, 144 pp
Net, $1.25

*LEMSTROM, S. Electricity in Agriculture and Horticulture.*
       Illustrated. 8vo., cloth Net, $1.50

*LIVERMORE, V. P., and WILLIAMS, J. How to Become a Competent Motorman:*
       Being a practical treatise on the proper method of operating a
       street-railway motor-car; also giving details how to overcome
       certain defects. Second Edition. Illustrated. 16mo., cloth, 247
       pp Net, $1.00

*LIVINGSTONE, R. Mechanical Design and Construction of Generators.*
       122 illustrations. 5 1/2 x 8 3/4, cloth, 228 pp Net, $3.50

  - *Mechanical Design and Construction of Commutators.* 62
    illustrations, 5 1/2 x 8 3/4, cloth, 93 pp Net, $2.25

*LOCKWOOD, T. D. Electricity, Magnetism, and Electro-Telegraphy.*
       A Practical Guide and Handbook of General Information for
       Electrical Students, Operators, and Inspectors. _Fourth Edition._
       Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 374 pp $2.50

*LODGE, OLIVER J. Signalling Across Space Without Wires:*
       Being a description of the work of Hertz and his successors.
       _Third Edition_ Illustrated. 8vo., cloth Net, $2.00

*LORING, A. E. A Handbook of the Electro-Magnetic Telegraph*
       _Fourth Edition, revised._ Illustrated. 16mo., cloth, 116 pp.
       (No. 39 Van Nostrands Science Series.) 50 cents

*LUCKTESH, M. Color and Its Application.*
       126 illustrations, 4 color plates. 6 x 9, cloth, 350 pp $3.00

  - *Light and Shade and Their Applications.* 135 illustrations, 10
    tables, 6 1/4 x 9 1/4, cloth, 278 pp Net, $2.50

*MALCOLM, W. H. Theory of the Submarine Telegraph Cable.*
       _In Press_

*MANSFIELD, A. N. Electromagnets: Their Design and Construction.*
       _Second Edition._ Illustrated. 16mo M cloth, 155 pp. (No. 64 Van
       Nostrands Science Series.) 50 cents

  - *Manufacture of Electric Light Carbons.* Illustrated. 5 1/2 x 8,
    cloth. Net, $1.00

*MASSIE, W. W., and UNDERBILL, C. R. Wireless Telegraphy and Telephony
Popularly Explained.*
       With a chapter by Nikola Tesla. Illustrated. 12mo., cloth, 82 pp
       Net, $1.00

*MAURICE, W. Electrical Blasting Apparatus and Explosives, with special
reference to colliery practice.*
       Illustrated. 8vo., cloth. 167 pp Net, 3.50

  - *The Shot Firers Guide.* A practical manual on blasting and the
    prevention of blasting accidents. 78 illustrations. 8vo., cloth. 212
    pp Net, $1.50

*MIESSNER, B. F. Radiodynamics.*
       The wireless control of torpedoes and other mechanisms. 112
       illustrations, 5 1/2 x 8 1/4, cloth, 211 pp. Net, $2.00

*MONCKTON, C. C. F. Radio Telegraphy.*
       173 Illustrations. 8vo cloth, 272 pp. (Van Nostrands Westminster
       Series.) Net, $2.00

*MONTGOMERY, J. W. Electric Wiring Specifications*
       4 x 6 1/2, cloth, 107 pp Net, $1.50

*MORECROFT, J. H. and HEHRE, F. W. A Short Course in Testing of
Electrical Machinery.*
       _Third Edition._ Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 160 pp Net, 1.50

*MORGAN, ALFRED P. Wireless Telegraph Construction for Amateurs.*
       _Third Edition._ 167 illustrations. 5 1/2 x 7 1/2, cloth, 236 pp
       Net, $1.50

*NERZ, F. Searchlights, Their Theory, Construction and Application.*
       Translated by C. Rodgers. 47 illustrations. 6 x 8,, cloth, 145
       pp. Net, $3.00

*NIPHER, FRANCIS E. Theory of Magnetic Measurements.*
       With an Appendix on the Method of Least Squares. Illustrated.
       12mo., cloth, 94 pp $1.00

*OHM, G. S. The Galvanic Circuit Investigated Mathematically.*
       Berlin, 1827. Translated by William Francis. With Preface and
       Notes by Thos. D. Lockwood. _Second Edition._ Illustrated. 16mo.,
       cloth, 269 pp. (No. 102 Van Nostrands Science Series.) 50 cents

*OLSSON, ANDREW. Motor Control as used in Connection with Turret Turning
and Gun Elevating.*
       (The Ward Leonard System.) 13 illustrations. 12mo., paper, 27 pp.
       (U. S. Navy Electrical Series No. 1.) Net, .50

*OUDIN, MAURICE A. Standard Polyphase Apparatus and Systems.*
       _Sixth Edition, revised._ Illustrated with many
       Photo-reproductions, Diagrams, and Tables. 8vo., cloth, 369 pp
       Net, $3.00

*PALAZ, A. Treatise on Industrial Photometry.* Specially applied to
       Electric Lighting. Translated from the French by G. W. Patterson,
       Jr., and M. R. Patterson. _Second Edition._ Fully Illustrated.
       8vo., cloth, 324 pp $4.00

*PARR, G. D. A. Electrical Engineering Measuring Instruments for
Commercial and Laboratory Purposes.*
       With 370 Diagrams and Engravings. 8vo., cloth, 328 pp Net, $3.50

*PARSHALL, H. P., and HOBART, H. M. Armature Windings of Electric
Machines.*
       _Third Edition._ With 140 full-page Plates, 65 Tables, and 165
       pages of descriptive letter-press. 4vo., cloth, 300 pp. $7.50

  - *Electric Railway Engineering.* With 437 Figures and Diagrams and
    many Tables. 4to., cloth, 475 pp Net, $7.50
  - *Electric Machine Design.* Being a revised and enlarged edition of
    "Electric Generators." 648 Illustrations. 4vo., half morocco, 601 pp
    Net, $12.50

*PATCHELL W. H. Application of Electric Power to Mines and heavy
Industries.*
       91 illustrations 6 1/2 x 9 1/4, cloth, 203 pp Net, 4.00

*PATTERSON, G. W. L. Wiring Calculations for Light and Power
Installations.*
       139 illustrations, 5 1/4 x 7 1/4. cloth, 203 pp Net, $2.00

  - *Electric Mine Signalling and Installations.* Illustrated. 5 1/4 x 7
    1/8, 110 pp Net, $1.50

*PERRINE, F. A. C. Conductors for Electrical Distribution: Their
Manufacture and Materials the Calculation of Circuits, Pole Line
Construction, Underground Working, and other Uses.*
       _Second Edition._ Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 287 pp Net, $3.50

*POPE, F. L. Modern Practice of the Electric Telegraph.*
       A Handbook for Electricians and Operators. _Seventeenth Edition_.
       Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 234 pp $1.50

*RAPHAEL, F. C. Localization of Faults in Electric Light Mains.*
       _Third Edition In Press_

*RASCH, E. Electric Arc Phenomena.* Translated by K. Tornberg.
       52 illustrations. 5 x 7, cloth, 187pp Net, $2.00

*RAYMOND, E. B. Alternating-Current Engineering, Practically Treated.*
       _Third Edition, revised_. With many Figures and Diagrams. 8vo.,
       cloth, 244 pp Net, $2.50

*REDFERN, T. B. and SAVIN, J. Bells, Indicators, Telephones, Fire and
Burglar Alarms.*
       85 illustrations. 4 1/2 x 6 3/4, cloth, 123 pp. (Installation
       Manuals Series) .50

*RICHARDSON, S. S. Magnetism and Electricity and the Principles of
Electrical Measurement.*
       Illustrated. 12mo., cloth, 596 pp. Net, $2.00

*ROBERTS, J. Laboratory Work in Electrical EngineeringPreliminary
Grade.*
       A series of laboratory experiments for first and second-year
       students in electrical engineering. Illustrated with many
       Diagrams. 8vo., cloth, 218 pp Net, $2.00

*ROLLINS, W. Notes on X-Light.*
       Printed on deckle edge Japan paper 400 pp. of text, 152 full-page
       plates. 8vo., cloth Net, $5.00

*RUHMER, ERNST. Wireless Telephony in Theory and Practice.*
       Translated from the German by James Erskine-Murray. Illustrated.
       5vo., cloth, 224 pp Net, $3.50

*RUSSELL, A. The Theory of Electric Cables and Networks.*
       71 Illustrations. 8vo., cloth, 275 pp Net, $3.00

*SAYERS, H. M. Brakes for Tramway Cars.*
       6 x 9, cloth, 76 pp. Net, 1.25

*SEVER, G. F. Electrical Engineering Experiments and Tests on
Direct-Current Machinery.*
       _Second Edition, enlarged_. With Diagrams and Figures. 8vo.,
       pamphlet, 75 pp Net, $1.00

*SEVER, G. F., and TOWNSEND, F. Laboratory and Factory Tests in
Electrical Engineering.*
       _Second Edition, revised and enlarged._ Illustrated. 8vo., cloth,
       269 pp Net, $2.50

*SEWALL, C. H. Wireless Telegraphy. With Diagrams and Figures.*
       _Second Edition, corrected_. Illustrated . 8vo., cloth, 229 pp
       Net, $2.00

  - *Lessons in Telegraphy.* Illustrated. 12mo., cloth, 104 pp Net,
    $1.00

*SEWELL, T The Construction of Dynamos (Alternating and Direct
Current).*
       A Text-book for students, engineering contractors, and
       electricians-in-charge. Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 316 pp $3.00

*SHELDON, S., and HAUSMANN, E Dynamo-Electric Machinery: Its
Construction, Design, and Operation.*

*Vol.1.: Direct-Current Machines.*
       _Ninth Edition, completely re-written._ Illustrated. 12mo.,
       cloth, 281 pp Net, $2.50

*Vol. II.: Alternating-Current Machines:*
       _Tenth Edition, rewritten._ cloth, 353 pp Net, $2.50

  - *Electric Traction and Transmission Engineering* 127 illustration.
    12mo., cloth, 317 pp Net, $2.50

*SLOANE, T. OCONOR. Elementary Electrical Calculations.*
       A Manual of Simple Engineering Mathematics, covering the whole
       field of Direct Current Calculations, the basis of Alternating
       Current Mathematics, Networks, and typical cases of Circuits,
       with Appendices on special subjects. 8vo., cloth. Illustrated.
       304 pp Net, $2.00

*SMITH, C. F. Practical Alternating Currents, and Alternating Current
Testing.*
       _Third Edition._ 236 illustrations. 5 3/4 x 8 3/4, cloth, 476 pp.
       Net $2.60

*SMITH, C. F. Practical Testing of Dynamos and Motors.*
       _Third Edition_, 108 illustrations. 5 1/4 x 8 3/4, cloth, 322 pp
       Net, $2.00

*SNELL, ALBION T. Electric Motive Power.*
       The Transmission and Distribution of Electric Power by Continuous
       and Alternating Currents. With a Section on the Applications of
       Electricity to Mining Work. _Second Edition_. Illustrated. 8vo.,
       cloth, 411 pp Net, $4.00

*SODDY, F. Radio-Activity; an Elementary Treatise from the Standpoint of
the Disintegration Theory.*
       Fully Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 214 pp Net, $3.00

*SOLOMON, MAURICE. Electric Lamps.*
       Illustrated. 8vo., cloth. (Van Nostrands Westminster Series.)
       Net, $2.00

*SWINBURNE, JAS., and WORDINGHAM, C. H. The Measurement of Electric
Currents. Electrical Measuring Instruments. Meters for Electrical
Energy.*
       Edited, with Preface, by T. Commerford Martin. Folding Plate and
       Numerous Illustrations. 16mo., cloth, 241 pp. (No. 109 Van
       Nostrands Science Series.) 50 cents

*SWOOPE, C. WALTON. Lessons in Practical Electricity: Principle
Experiments, and Arithmetical Problems. An Elementary Textbook.*
       With numerous Tables, Formulae, and two large Instruction Plates.
       _Fifteenth Edition, revised_. Illustrated. 5vo., cloth, 462 pp
       Net, $2.00

*THIESS, J. B. and JOY, G. A. Toll Telephone Practice.*
       273 illustrations. 8vo., cloth, 433 pp Net, $3.50

*THOM, C., and JONES, W. H. Telegraphic Connections, embracing recent
methods in Quadruplex Telegraphy.*
       20 Colored Plates. 8vo., cloth, 59 pp $1.50

*THOMPSON, S. P., Prof. Dynamo-Electric Machinery.*
       With an Introduction and Notes by Frank L. Pope and H. R. Butler.
       Illustrated 16vo., cloth, 214 pp. (No. 66 Van Nostrands Science
       Series.) 50 cents

  - *Recent Progress in Dynamo-Electric Machines.*
           Being a Supplement to "Dynamo-Electric Machinery."
           Illustrated. 16mo., cloth, 113 pp. (No. 75 Van Nostrands
           Science Series.) 50 cents


*TOWNSEND, FITZHUGH. Alternating Current Engineering.*
       Illustrated. 8vo, paper, 32 pp Net, 75 cents

*UNDERBILL, C. R. Solenoids, Electromagnets and Electromagnetic
Windings.*
       _Second Edition_. 218 Illustrations. 12mo., cloth, 345 pp Net,
       $2.00

*URQUHART, J. W. Electroplating.*
       _Fifth Edition_. Illustrated. 12mo., cloth, 230 pp $2.00

  - *Electrotyping.* Illustrated. 12mo., cloth, 228 pp $2.00

*VOSMAER, A. Ozone.* Its Manufacture and Uses.
       76 illustrations. 6 x 9, cloth, 210 pp Net, $2.50

*WADE, E. J. Secondary Batteries: Their Theory, Construction, and Use.*
       _Second Edition, corrected_ 265 illustrations. 8vo., cloth, 501
       pp. Net, $4.00

*WADSWORTH, C. Primary Battery Ignition.*
       A simple practical pocket guide on the construction, operation,
       maintenance, and testing of primary batteries for automobile,
       motorboat, and stationary engine ignition service. 26
       illustrations. 5 x 7, cloth, 79 pp Net, 0.50

*WALKER, FREDERICK. Practical Dynamo Building for Amateurs. How to Wind
for any Output.*
       _Third Edition_. Illustrated. 16mo., cloth, 104 pp. (No. 68 Van
       Nostrands Science Series.) 50 cents.

  - *Electricity in Mining.* Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 385 pp $.50

*WATT, ALEXANDER. Electroplating and Refining of Metals*
       _New Edition_, rewritten by Arnold Philip. Illustrated 8vo.,
       cloth, 704 pp Net, $4.50

  - *Electro-metallurgy*
           _Fifteenth Edition_. Illustrated 12mo., cloth, 225 pp $1.00


*WEBB, H. L. A Practical Guide to the Testing of Insulated Wires and
Cables*
       _Sixth Edition_. Illustrated. 12mo., cloth., 118pp $1.00

*WILKINSON, H. D. Submarine Cable-Laying, Repairing, and Testing.*
       _Second Edition, completely revised_. 313 illustrations. 8vo.,
       cloth, 580 pp Net, $6.00

*WILSON, J. F. Essentials of Electrical Engineering.*
       300 illustrations. 6 x 9, cloth, 355 pp Net, $2.50

*WRIGHT, J. Testing, Fault Localization and General Hints for Linemen.*
       19 Illustrations. 16mo., cloth, 88 pp. (Installation Serious
       Manuals.) Net, 50 cents.

*YOUNG, J. ELTON. Electrical Testing for Telegraph Engineers.*
       Illustrated. 8vo., cloth, 264 pp Net, $4.00

*ZEIDLER, J., and LUSTGARTEN, J. Electric Arc Lamps: Their Principles,
Construction and Working.*
       160 Illustrations. 8vo., cloth, 188 pp Net, $2.00




        A 96 page Catalog of Books on Electricity, classified by

          subjects, will be furnished gratis, postage prepaid,

                            on application.




                        D. VAN NOSTRAND COMPANY


                  are prepared to supply, either from

                       their complete stock or at

                             short notice,


                            Any Technical or

                            Scientific Book


                 In addition to publishing a very large

                  and varied number of SCIENTIFIC AND

                   ENGINEERING BOOKS, D. Van Nostrand

                    Company have on hand the largest

                assortment in the United States of such

                  books issued by American and foreign

                              publishers.


                    All inquiries are cheerfully and

                carefully answered and complete catalogs

                         sent free on request.

                       25 PARK PLACE - - NEW YORK
